wy
-;, DOCUMENTARY
EVIDENCE of
“SJESUS” T7EYEAR
JOURNEY to
~athe EAST



Leh is a remarkable site. Here the

legends connected the paths of Buddha
and Christ. Buddha went through Leh
northwards. Issa communed here with

the people on his way from Tibet. Secretly
and cautiously the legends are guarded.
It is difficult to sound them because lamas,
above all people, know how to keep silent.
Only by means of a common language—
and not merely that of tongue but also
of inner understanding—can one
approach their significant mysteries.

Nicholas — Roerich


106 NOTOVITCH CHAPTER TWO

thousand volumes only. Truly these be very incom-
plete catalogues indeed, the monastery of Lassa
alone containing more than a hundred thousand,
and I sincerely pity my adversary if he thinks this
germ furnishes him with a key to the whole cycle
of Eastern science.

The truth, indeed, is that the verses of which
I give a translation in my book are probably not to
be found in any kind of catalogue, either of the
Tanjur or the Kanjur. They are to be found scat-
tered through more than one book without any
title; consequently, they could not be found in
catalogues of Chinese and Thibetan works. They
figure as mementos of a remarkable fact which took
place in the first century of the Christian era and
which the scribes amongst the lamas jotted down,
according to the best of their recollection, with
more or less of clearness or confusion.

If I have had the patience to join these verses,
the one to the other, arranging them in consecutive
order to form sense and deducing from them what
forms my translation, shall this work of patient
labor be called into question?

Does not tradition inform us that the Iliad, as
we have possessed it for 2,500 years, was constituted
in this manner by order of Pisistratus from scattered
chants commemorating the Trojan war and piously
preserved in the memory of Greek creeds?

Mr. Max Miiller further reproaches me with
not having mentioned by name the cardinal of
the Roman Church who honored me by curious


THE UNKNOWN LIFE OF JESUS CHRIST 12 3

confidences on the subject of The Unknown Life of
Jesus Christ and whose frank utterances might be
held to confirm my discovery. But I invoke the
imperious laws of propriety, and everyone must
own that in the circumstances I mention, it would
not be seemly to disclose the cardinal's name.

I may, however, add to what I have already said
in my introduction, as to having learnt from him
that The Unknown Life of Jesus Christ is no novelty
to the Roman Church, this: that the Vatican
Library possesses sixty-three complete or incom-
plete manuscripts in various Oriental languages
referring to this matter, which have been brought to
Rome by missionaries from India, China, Egypt,
and Arabia.

This question brings me to explain, once for
all, my aim in handing over to the Western public
a document of such importance, which, I confess,
anyone has a right to criticize freely.

Was it to invalidate the authority of the Gospels
and the whole New Testament? Not in the least
degree. In the French journal La Paix, I concisely
affirmed my belief in the orthodox Russian religion,
and I hold to that affirmation. Invalidation could
not exist without antinomy in doctrine and contra-
diction as to facts. But the doctrine contained in
these Thibetan verses is the same as that of the Gos-
pels, and the facts only differ in outward seeming.

Indeed, we should remark that the first who
drew up these verses in the Pali tongue scrupu-
lously reproduced the narratives of the indigenous


108 NOTOVITCH CHAPTER TWO

merchants (not Jewish, as Mr. Max Miiller will
have it) on their return from Palestine, whither
they had gone for their business and had happened
to be at the time of the drama of Calvary.

There should be nothing astonishing in these
witnesses seeing things from a different point of
view to that of the Romans, who were ultimately to
adopt the religion of their victim. It was only nat-
ural that they should, preferably, adopt the version
which was current amongst the Jewish people.

What should be authenticated is whether these
were impartial witnesses and whether the scribes
faithfully and intelligently transmitted their say-
ings. But this is a question of exegesis, which it does
not behoove me to settle.

I would rather restrict myself, and would advise
my detractors to restrict themselves, to this simpler
question: Did those passages exist in the monastery
of Himis, and have I faithfully reproduced their sub-
stance? That is the only ground on which I recog-
nize any honest right to provoke me to enter the lists.

I offered to return to Thibet in the company
of recognized Orientalists to verify the authenticity
of these passages on the spot. No one responded
to this proposal. The greater number contented
themselves with attacking me, and those who did
make an attempt to find these passages set about it
in the wrong way.

I learn, however, that an American mission is
in course of formation, irrespective of any partici-
pation on my part, and is preparing to take this


THE UNKNOWN LIFE OF JESUS CHRIST 12 3

journey with a view of undertaking a serious en-
quiry for itself. I do not fear its investigations; on
the contrary, I acclaim them with all my heart.
This enquiry will demonstrate that, far from inno-
vating, I have merely given a tangible form to a
tradition that from all time has been afloat in the
Christian world.

The New Testament is absolutely silent con-
cerning that period of the Saviour's life which
extends from his thirteenth to his thirtieth year.
What had become of him during that lapse of time?
What had he done? Show me any passage that will
even approximately establish as a fact that he never
did go either to Thibet or to India and I lay down
my arms. But the most obstinate sectarians would
have much difficulty in showing me such a passage.

Moreover, would it be strange ifthe founder of
the Christian religion inspired himself with these
Brahmanical or Buddhist doctrines with a view of
transforming them, of purifying them from their
dross and bringing them within reach of Western
intelligences? Moses did not act differently. When
he wrote Genesis and promulgated the law of
justice, he referred himself to books and laws which
were anterior to his own. He acknowledges this on
several occasions. This is the ABC of exegesis.

Is it not invariably the case that all religions,
even the most barbarous and absurd, have ever
preserved some fragments of truth and have pos-
sessed some opening by which integral Truth should
one day enter—thus showing that their roots issued


110 NOTOVITCH CHAPTER TWO

from a common stock and that after being sub-
divided into many branches, they would later on be
gathered into one sheaf under a sole guardianship?
Far from rejecting these shreds of truth without
examination, Christianity hastened to adopt them
by bestowing on them their true sense and adapting
them to the mystic needs of nations.

If it were not so, would St. John the Evange-
list have made so many efforts to appropriate the
Logos of Plato and to transform it into that Eternal
and Incarnate Word whose incomparable majesty
has relegated to oblivion the highest conceptions of
the Greek philosopher?

If it were not so, why should the Fathers of the
Greek and Latin churches, St. John Chrysostom,
St. Augustine (to quote only the most famous
amongst them), have taken so much trouble to
disengage from the medley and trash of myth-
ologies those profound interpretations and moral
teachings which they admit of—regenerating the
fable, if I may be allowed this neologism, by
restoring the myths to their true inner meaning?

I leave to experts the task of disengaging from
Brahmanism and Buddhism the truths enshrouded
in the parables of Sakyamuni and the Vedas.

To return to my book. I maintain that if it
undeniably establishes an agreement between the
teachings of the Gospels and those of the sacred
books of India and Thibet, it will have rendered
signal service to the whole of humanity.


THE UNKNOWN LIFE OF JESUS CHRIST 12 3

Is it a new thing in the Christian world—a
book that aims at completing the New Testament
and throwing light on hitherto obscure points? The
works known as apocryphas were so numerous in
the sixteenth century that the Latin Council of
Trent was forced to curtail an immense number of
them so as to avoid controversies that would have
been hurtful to the interests of the public and to
reduce the Book of Revelation to the minimum
accessible to commonplace minds.

Had not the Nicene Council, with the
Emperor Constantine's consent, already proscribed
many manuscripts in the hands of the faithful,
which were regarded by them with a veneration
almost equal to that which they professed for the
four canonical Gospels? The Nicene Council, in
common with that of Trent, also reduced to a
minimum the sum of transcendental truths.

Is it not on record that Stilicho, a general of
Honorius, caused the Sibylline Books to be pub-
licly burnt in the year 401? Can it be denied that
these were full to overflowing of moral, historical,
and prophetic truths of the highest order? That
would be giving the lie to the whole of Roman
history, whose most important events were deter-
mined by the decisions of the Sibylline Books.

In the times of which we speak, there was every
motive for establishing or supporting a badly consol-
idated or already tottering religion, and the spiritual
and temporal authorities believed that this could not


112 NOTOVITCH CHAPTER TWO

be done better than by organizing a vigorous watch
and an implacable censorship over eternal truths.

But enlightened minds were so little desirous
of rejecting in a mass all documents that did not
tally with official measurement that they them-
selves rescued a certain number from oblivion. In
the last three hundred years those editions of the
Bible which admit as appendices the Book of the
Pastor of St. Hermas, the Epistle of St. Clement,
that of St. Barnabas, the Prayer of Manasses, and
the two complementary Books of the Maccabees
are by no means rare.

The Four Gospels form the basis of Christian
teaching. But there were twelve apostles. St.
Bartholomew, St. Thomas, St. Matthias profess to
have preached the glad tidings to the peoples of the
Indies, of Thibet, and of China.

Have these friends of Jesus, these familiar
witnesses of his preaching and his martyrdom,
written nothing? Did they leave to others exclu-
sively the office of transcribing on papyrus the
sublime teachings of the Master? But these others
wrote in Greek, and the Greek tongue was not
heard or understood beyond the Euphrates. How
could they have preached in Greek to men who
only understood Pali, Sanskrit, or the multiplied
Hindustani and Chinese dialects?

St. Thomas notably had the repute of being
the most lettered disciple amongst his colleagues,
who were mostly workingmen. In default of marble
or brass, would not St. Thomas have engraved on


THE UNKNOWN LIFE OF JESUS CHRIST 12 3

imperishable tablets those things which he had
seen, those lessons which he had learnt from the
crucified Lord?

The verses which were communicated to me
by the Buddhist lama of the monastery of Himis,
which I put in their order of sequence so as to give
them consecutive sense and render them conform-
able to the rules of literary composition, may have
been actually spoken by St. Thomas—historical
sketches traced by his own hand or under his
direction.

May not this resurrection of books which have
been buried under the dust of secular ages be the
starting point of a new science which should be
fertile in unforeseen and unimaginable results?

These are the questions which are raised by my
book. Criticism would do itself honor by examining
them seriously. The subject is well worth the
trouble. It contains all the problems which agitate
humanity. I am convinced that researches would
not be fruitless. I gave the first blow with the
pickaxe and revealed the hidden treasure, but I have
reasons for believing that the mine is inexhaustible.

It is no longer today as it was in those past
centuries when one class of men alone were de-
positaries of integral Truth and dispensed to the
masses their share of indivisible property, each one
according to his needs. Today the world is eager for
knowledge, and everyone has a right to turn a page
of the book of science and to know the truth
concerning the Man-God who belongs to us all.


114 NOTOVITCH CHAPTER TWO

I believe in the authenticity of the Buddhist
narrative because I see nothing that can contradict
or invalidate it from a historical or theological
point of view. Let it be studied and discussed. Let
it even be proved to me that Iam wrong. But that is
no reason for insulting me. Insults only prove one
thing—the impotence of their authors.

I have put into practice the words of the
Prophet Daniel that the time will come when
"many shall run to and fro, and knowledge shall be
increased." I have studied, I have sought, I have
learnt, I have discovered. I hand over my knowl-
edge and my discovery to those readers who, like
myself, are desirous of learning and knowing.

I hand them over, through your agency, to the
English public in entire confidence, and I defer
beforehand to its verdict in the full conviction that
it will be an equitable one.

Yours very truly,

N. NOTOVITCH


Preface

S" the Turkish War (1877-78) I have made a
eries of travels in the East. After having visited
even the least remarkable localities in the peninsula
of the Balkans, I started across the Caucasus in
Central Asia and Persia and finally in 1887 left for
India, which wonderful country had attracted me
since my childhood.

My object in this journey was to become ac-
quainted with the peoples of India, to study their
manners and customs, and at the same time to in-
vestigate the grand and mysterious archaeology and
majestically colossal nature of this marvelous country.

Wandering without any fixed plan from one
place to another, I reached as far as mountainous
Afghanistan, whence I regained India by the pictur-
esque passes of Bolan and Guernai. I then reas-
cended the Indus as far as Rawalpindi, travelled
over the Punjab, the country of the five great
streams, visited the Golden Temple of Amritsar, the
tomb of the King of Punjab Ranjit Singh near
Lahore, and directed my steps towards Kashmir,
"the valley of eternal happiness."


Chapter One

THE LOST YEARS OFjESUS

Analysis of eyewitness accounts
of travelers who have made the trek to Himis


116 NOTOVITCH CHAPTER TWO

There I recommenced my peregrinations as
curiosity led me until I arrived in Ladak, whence
I had the intention of returning to Russia by way of
Karakorum and Chinese Turkestan.

One day, in the course of a visit I made to a
Buddhist convent on my route, I learned from the
chief lama that there existed in the archives of
Lassa very ancient records treating on the life of
Jesus Christ and the nations of the West and that
certain great monasteries possessed copies and
translations of the same.

As it seemed then very improbable I should
ever revisit that country, I determined to postpone
my return to Europe to a later date and, coute que
coute,* to find these copies either in the great
convents already mentioned or by going to Lassa.
The journey to Lassa is far from being as dan-
gerous and difficult as we are led to believe; it
presented only such perils as I was well accus-
tomed to and which would not have deterred me
from attempting it.

During my stay in Leh, capital of Ladak,
I visited the great convent Himis, situated in the
environs of the town, whose library I was informed
by its chief lama contained certain copies of the
manuscripts in question. Not to awaken the suspi-
cions of the authorities as to the object of my visit
to the convent and to avoid any obstacles that
might be raised to my further journeying in

Thibet—I_ being a Russian—I made known my
*[cost what it may—ED)


THE UNKNOWN LIFE OF JESUS CHRIST 12 3

intention of returning to India and at once left the
capital of Ladak.

An unfortunate fall from my horse, through
which I fractured my leg, furnished me with a
quite unexpected excuse for returning to the mon-
astery, where first aid was given me. I profited by
my short stay among the lamas to obtain the
consent of their superior that the manuscripts rela-
tive to the life of Jesus Christ should be brought to
me. Thus, aided by my interpreter, who translated
from the Thibetan language, I was enabled to
carefully write down in my notebook what the
lama read to me.

Not doubting for one moment the authen-
ticity of this chronicle, written with great precision
by the Brahmanic and more especially Buddhistic
historians of India and Nepal, I determined on my
return to Europe to publish a translation of it.
With this intent I addressed myself to several well-
known ecclesiastics, begging them to revise my
notes and to tell me what they thought of them.

Mgr. Platon, the celebrated metropolitan of
Kiev, formed the opinion that this discovery was of
great importance. Nevertheless he dissuaded me
from publishing the memoirs, on the pretext that
their appearance could only be prejudicial to me.
In what way the venerable prelate refused to ex-
plain more fully. As our conversation took place in
Russia, where the Censor would have assuredly put
his veto on a work of the kind, I resolved to wait.


118 NOTOVITCH CHAPTER TWO

A year later, finding myselfin Rome, I showed
my manuscript to a cardinal who is au mieux* with
the Holy Father. He answered me textually as fol-
lows: "What would be the good of publishing this?
No one will attach much importance to it, and you
will make yourself a crowd of enemies. However,
you are still very young! Ifit be a question of money
which interests you, I might ask that a reward
should be made to you for your notes, which should
indemnify you for the expenses you have incurred
and the time you have lost." Naturally I refused.

In Paris I spoke of my projects to Cardinal
Rotelli, whose acquaintance I had previously made
in Constantinople. He also opposed the publica-
tion of my work, for the ostensible reason that it
would be premature. "The Church," he added,
"suffers already too much from the new wave of
atheistical thought. You will only give fresh pas-
ture to the detractors and calumniators of the
evangelical doctrine. I tell you this in the interest
of all the Christian churches."

Then I went to see M. Jules Simon. He found
my communication interesting and recommended
me to ask M. Renan's advice as to the best means
of publishing the memoirs.

The next day I was seated in the study of the
great philosopher. Our interview ended in this way:
M. Renan proposed that I should entrust him with
the memoirs in question, with the view of his
making a report on them to the Academy.

This proposition was, as may be imagined,

e{on the best of terms—ED.]


THE UNKNOWN LIFE OF JESUS CHRIST 12 3

very alluring and flattering to my amour propre.*
Nevertheless I carried away my work on the pretext
of further revising it. I foresaw that if] accepted this
combination, I should only have the honor of
having discovered the chronicle, while the illus-
trious author of the Vie de Jesus would gain all
the kudos through commenting upon it and making
it public.

Therefore, as I believed myself sufficiently
prepared to publish the translation of the chronicle
and to accompany it by my notes, I declined the
very kindly meant offer thus made to me. Not,
however, to hurt in any way the susceptibility of
the great master, whom I deeply respected, I deter-
mined to await his demise, which sad occurrence
I foresaw —judging from his enfeebled condition-
could not be far off.

This prognostication having come true, I has-
tened to put the notes I now publish in order,
reserving to myself the right of affirming the
authenticity of these chronicles and developing in
my commentaries the arguments which should
convince us of the sincerity and good faith of the
Buddhist compilers.

I suggest in conclusion that before criticizing
my communication, any learned society can, at
relatively small outlay, equip a scientific expedition
having for its mission the investigation of these
manuscripts on the spot and thus verifying their

historic value.

+|self-esteem—ED.) .. ..
NICOLAS NOTOVITCH


120 NOTOVITCH CHAPTER TWO

P.S. During my journey I took a considerable
number of very curious photographs, but when on
arrival at Bombay I examined the negatives,
I found they had all become obliterated. This
misfortune was due to the imprudence of my
Negro, Philippe, to whom I had entrusted the box
containing the plates. During the journey, finding
it heavy, he had carefully removed the contents,
thus rendering by exposure to the light all my labor
useless.

I have therefore in illustrating my book had
recourse to the extreme kindness of my friend
M. d'Auvergne, who, having made a journey to
the Himalayas, graciously offered me a selection
from his photographs.


rea ca

The Author's Itinerary across India


Journey to Thibet

a my sojourn in India I had frequent
opportunity of conversing with the Buddhists,

and the accounts they gave me about Thibet excited
my curiosity to such an extent that I resolved to
make a journey into that comparatively unknown
country. With this object, I chose a route cross-
ing the province of Kashmir, a place I had long
intended to visit.

On October 14, 1887,1 took my seat in a train
crowded with soldiers and started from Lahore for
Rawalpindi, where I arrived next day towards noon.
After resting a little and inspecting the town,
which, from its permanent garrison, has the aspect
of a war camp, I purchased such things as seemed
necessary for a campaign in districts not yet reached
by the railway.

Assisted by my servant "Philippe," a Negro of
Pondicherry whom I had taken into my service on
the warm recommendation of the French consul at
Bombay, I packed up my baggage, hired a tonga
(a two-wheeled conveyance drawn by ponies), and
having installed myself on the seat behind, set out
along the picturesque road which leads to Kashmir.


THE UNKNOWN LIFE OF JESUS CHRIST 123

Our tonga made rapid progress over the
ground, though at one time we had to steer with
considerable dexterity through a large convoy of
soldiers, who, with their baggage carried on the
backs of camels, formed part of a detachment
returning from encampment to the town. We soon
passed the valley of the Punjab and, climbing a path
with endless windings, entered the zigzags of the
Himalayas.

Here the steeps became more and more abrupt,
the delightful panorama of the region we had just
traversed rolling behind us and becoming engulfed
at our feet. The sun had illumined the mountain-
tops with its last rays when our tonga gaily left the
zigzags we had traced on the crest of the wooded
height, at whose foot nestles Murree, a sanatorium
always crowded in summer with the families of
English functionaries who go there to seek freshness
and shade.

Usually the tonga is available from Murree to
Srinagar; but at the approach of winter, when
all Europeans desert Kashmir, the service is sus-
pended. I undertook my journey precisely at the
wane of the season, much to the astonishment of
the English I met upon the road returning to India,
who tried in vain to guess the object of my doing so.

The roadway being at the time of my depar-
ture still in course of construction, I hired saddle
horses—not without difficulty—and evening had
set in by the time we began our descent from
Murree, which stands at an altitude of 5,000 feet.

Our journey, along a dark road seamed with


124 NOTOVITCH CHAPTER TWO

ruts by the recent rains, was not a particularly merry
one, our horses having to feel rather than see their
way. As night fell, a storm of rain surprised us
while, owing to the thick oaks bordering our path,
we were plunged into such impenetrable darkness
that, for fear of losing sight of each other, we were
obliged to shout out every now and again. In this
profound obscurity we realized heavy masses of rock
almost above our heads, while to the left, hidden by
the trees, roared a torrent whose waters must have
formed a cascade.

The icy rain had chilled us to the bone, and we
had been tramping in the mud for nearly two hours
when a faint light in the distance revived our
energies.

Lights in the mountains, however, are but
treacherous beacons. They appear to be burning
quite close, when in reality they are far away and
disappear only to shine forth anew as the road twists
and turns—now to the right, now to the left, now
above, now below—seeming to take pleasure in
deluding the weary traveller, from whom the dark-
ness hides the fact that his longed-for goal is
really motionless and its distance becoming less-
ened every second.

I had given up all hope of ever reaching the
light we had descried when it suddenly reappeared,
and this time so near to us that our horses stopped of
their own accord.

Here I must sincerely thank the English for the
forethought they have displayed in building on all


THE UNKNOWN LIFE OF JESUS CHRIST 12 3

the roads small bungalows—one-storied inns des-
tined to shelter travellers. It is true one must not
expect much comfort in these semi-hotels, but that
is a matter of small importance to the weary
traveller, who is more than grateful to find a dry,
clean room at his disposal.

Doubtless the Hindus in charge of the particu-
lar bungalow we had come across had not expected
to see visitors at such an advanced hour of the night
and at such a season of the year, for they had left the
place and carried off the keys, necessitating our
breaking open the door. Once inside, I flung myself
on a bed hastily prepared by my Negro—boasting a
pillow and a rug half saturated with water—and was
almost instantaneously asleep.

At the break of day, after having taken tea and
a small portion of our tinned meats, we continued
our journey, bathed by the burning rays of the sun.
From time to time we passed villages, at first in a
splendid defile and then along a road which winds
through the very heart of the mountains. We
descended at last as far as the river Jnelum, whose
waters flow smoothly amid the rocks by which their
course is impeded and between two ravines whose
summits seem almost to touch the azure vault of
the Himalayan sky, here presenting an aspect re-
markably cloudless and serene.

Towards midday we reached the hamlet of
Tongue, situated on a bank of the river. It presents
a unique row of cabins, having the appearance of
cases open in front. Here eatables are sold and all


And there are also many
other things which Jesus did,
the which, if they should be
written every one, I suppose
that even the world itself
could not contain the books
that should be written...

John


126 NOTOVITCH CHAPTER TWO

kinds of goods. The place swarms with Hindus,
bearing on their foreheads the diversely colored
insignia of their castes. Handsome Kashmirians
are also to be seen, wearing long white shirts and
spotless turbans.

I hired here at a high price the Hindu cabrio-
let of a Kashmirian. This vehicle is constructed in
such a fashion that to sit in it, one is obliged to
cross one's legs d la Turque, the seat being so small
that it is only just possible for two persons to
squeeze into it. Although the absence of any kind
of back renders locomotion somewhat dangerous,
I nevertheless preferred this sort of circular table
mounted on wheels to a horse, anxious as I was to
reach my journey's end as quickly as possible.

I had not driven more than half a kilometer
when I began seriously to regret the animal I had
abandoned, so tired did I feel from my constrained
position and the difficulty I experienced in main-
taining my equilibrium.

Unfortunately, it was already late, evening
had set in, and by the time I reached the village of
Hori my legs were horribly cramped. I was worn
out with fatigue, bruised by the incessant jolting,
and utterly incapable of enjoying the picturesque
scenery stretching before my eyes along the Jhe-
lum, from whose banks rise on one side steep rocks
and on the other wooded hills.

At Hori I met a caravan of pilgrims returning
from Mecca. Believing me to be a doctor and
hearing of my haste to reach Ladak, they begged


THE UNKNOWN LIFE OF JESUS CHRIST 12 3

me to join their party, which I promised to do after
reaching Srinagar, for which place I started on
horseback next day at dawn.

I passed the night in a bungalow, seated on a
bed with a light in my hand, not daring to close my
eyes for fear of being attacked by a scorpion or
centipede. The place simply swarmed with them,
and though I felt ashamed of the loathing they
awakened in me, still I could not overcome the
feeling. Where, indeed, is the line to be drawn
between courage and cowardice in a man? I should
certainly never boast of especial bravery, neither
would I confess to want of courage; yet the repul-
sion with which these obnoxious little creatures
inspired me banished sleep from my eyelids, in
spite of my extreme fatigue.

At daybreak our horses were making their way
at a gentle trot along a level valley enclosed by high
hills and, bathed as I was by the sun's hot rays,
I very nearly fell asleep in my saddle. A sudden
sense of freshness awakening me, I perceived we
were beginning to ascend a mountain path through
a vast forest which at times opened out, allowing us
to admire at leisure the magnificent course of an
impetuous torrent, and at others hid from our gaze
the mountains, the sky, and the entire landscape,
leaving us en revanche* the songs of a crowd of
birds with spotted plumage.

We emerged from the forest towards midday,
descending as far as a little hamlet by the riverside
where we lunched before continuing our journey.

¢[in return; in compensation—ED.]



128 NOTOVITCH CHAPTER TWO

Here I visited the bazaar and tried to buy a glass of
warm milk from a Hindu, whom I found squatting
before a large pail of the boiling beverage. My
surprise may be imagined when this individual
proposed I should carry off the pail with its con-
tents, affirming that I had contaminated the same.

"I only want a glass of the milk, not the pail,"
I protested. But the Hindu remained obdurate.

"According to our laws," he insisted, "if any-
one not belonging to our caste looks fixedly and for
a length of time on any object or eatable belonging
to us, it is our duty to wash the object and to throw
the food into the street. Thou, O sahib! hast
polluted my milk. No one shall further drink of it;
for not only hast thou fixed it with thine eyes, but
thou hast pointed at it with thy finger."

This was quite accurate. In the first instance
I had carefully examined the milk to find out if it
were genuine, and I had, moreover, pointed to the
pail from which I wished the man to fill me a glass.
Full of respect for foreign laws and customs, I paid
without demur the rupee demanded—the price of
all the milk the merchant had emptied into the
gutter—though I had only benefited by one glass of
it. From this incident I learned a lesson—never to
fix my eyes upon Hindu food again.

There is no religious belief more entangled
with ceremonies, laws, and commentaries than
Brahmanism. Whilst each of the three principal
religions has but one Bible, one Testament, and


THE UNKNOWN LIFE OF JESUS CHRIST 12 3

one Koran—books from which the Jews, Chris-
tians, and Muhammadans draw their beliefs—the
Brahmanical Hindus possess so great a number
of commentaries in folio that the most learned
Brahman has rarely had time to master more than
a tenth part of them.

Putting on one side the four books of the
Vedas; the Puranas, written in Sanskrit and con-
taining 400,000 stanzas relating to theogonies,
law, medicine, and the creation, destruction, and
regeneration of the world; the vast Shastras, treat-
ing on mathematics, grammar, etc.; the Oupo-
vedas, Oupanichadas, and Oupo-puranas, serving
as indices to the Puranas; and a crowd of other
many-volumed commentaries, there still remain
the twelve exhaustive books containing the laws of
Manu, grandson of Brahma, books dealing not
only with the civil and penal laws but also the
canonical rules, which impose on their adepts
such an amazing number of ceremonies that one is
lost in wonder at the unchangeable patience of the
Hindus in their observance of the precepts dictated
to them by their saint.

Manu was indisputably a great legislator and a
great thinker, though he has written so exhaus-
tively that it happens sometimes that he contradicts
himself in the course ofa page. The Brahmans do
not take the trouble to remark this, however; and
the poor Hindus, on whose labor their caste virtu-
ally subsists, obey them with servility, taking as


130 NOTOVITCH CHAPTER TWO

gospel their mandates never to touch a man be-
longing to another caste and never to countenance
a stranger fixing his attention on their goods.

Keeping to the strict sense of this law, the
Hindu imagines his merchandise contaminated if
on the part of a stranger it has been subjected to
any particular scrutiny. And yet Brahmanism was,
even at the commencement of its second birth, a
religion purely monotheistic, recognizing but one
eternal and indivisible God.

As has happened since all time and in all
religions, the clergy have taken advantage of their
privileged position above the ignorant crowd to
hastily devise different laws and external forms
of worship, thinking thus to act more surely on
the masses—the result being that the principle of
monotheism, so clearly instilled by the Vedas, has
degenerated into a limitless series of absurd gods,
goddesses, demigods, genii, angels, and devils,
represented by idols, diverse in form and horrible
without exception.

The people, once great, even as their religion
was pure and elevating, have now degenerated into
a condition bordering on idiocy, slaves as they are
to the performance of those rites which the day is
scarce long enough to enumerate.

One may positively assert that the Hindus
merely exist to support the principal sect of Brah-
mans, who have taken into their hands the tem-
poral power formerly enjoyed by the independent
sovereigns of the people. In their government of


THE UNKNOWN LIFE OF JESUS CHRIST 12 3

India, the English do not interfere with this side
of public life, and the Brahmans take advantage of
this in encouraging in the nation the hope of a
different future.

But to return to our journey. The sun had
sunk behind the summit of a mountain, and the
shades of night had suddenly enveloped the coun-
try we were traversing. Soon the narrow valley
through which the Jhelum flows seemed to have
fallen asleep, while our path, winding along a
contracted corniche of peaked rocks, gradually
became hidden from our eyes. Mountains and
trees became blended in a single somber mass, and
the stars shone out brightly overhead.

We were eventually obliged to dismount and
to grope our way along the side of the mountain for
fear of becoming victims to the abyss yawning at
our feet. At an advanced hour of the night, we
crossed a bridge and climbed the peaked ascent
which leads to the bungalow of Uri, perched on its
height in complete isolation.

The next day we traversed a charming region,
almost skirting the river, at a turn of which we saw
the ruins of a Sikh fortress standing solitary and as
if meditating in sadness on the glory of its past. In
a little valley enclosed in the midst of the moun-
tains we came upon another friendly bungalow, in
whose close proximity lay the encampment of a
cavalry regiment of the maharajah of Kashmir.

Hearing of my Russian nationality, the officers
invited me to mess with them, and I had the


132 NOTOVITCH CHAPTER TWO

opportunity of making the acquaintance of Colonel
Brown, who was the first to compile a dictionary in
the Afghan-Pushtu language.

Being anxious to reach Srinagar as soon as
possible, I continued my journey through a pictur-
esque region which, after having for a considerable
time followed the course of the river, spread out at
the foot of the mountains. Before our eyes, wearied
by the monotony of the preceding landscape, a
well-populated valley now disclosed itself with two-
storied houses surrounded by gardens and cultivated
fields. A little further on commences the celebrated
Vale of Kashmir, situated behind a range of high
hills, which I crossed towards evening.

By the time I had reached the summit of the
last elevation separating the mountainous country
I had just been traversing from the valley, a superb
panorama met my gaze. The picture it formed was a
truly enchanting one. The Kashmirian vale, whose
limits are lost in the horizon and which throughout
is thickly peopled, nestles amid the high mountains
of the Himalayas. At sunrise and sunset the zone of
the eternal snows appears like a ring of silver,
girding this rich and charming plateau, seamed in
all directions by fine roadways and streams.

Gardens, hills, a lake whose numerous islets
are covered with bizarre constructions, all conspire
to transport the traveller into another world. For
him the limits of enchantment seem reached, and
he believes himself at last in the paradise of his
childhood's dreams.


THE UNKNOWN LIFE OF JESUS CHRIST 12 3

The shades of night were slowly falling-
merging mountains, gardens, and lakes in one
somber mass, pierced only by distant lights like
stars—when I descended into the valley, directing
my steps towards the Jhelum which has here traced
for itself, to unite its waters with those of the Indus,
a passage through a narrow defile in the midst of
the mountains. According to legend, the valley was
once a kind of inland sea, which a passage opening
between two rocks had dried up, leaving only in its
place the lake, a few pools, and the Jhelum, whose
banks are now lined with a number of long, narrow
vessels inhabited all the year round by the families
of their proprietors.

From here Srinagar may be reached in one
day's journey on horseback, while the journey
by boat takes a day and a half. I decided upon
the latter means of conveyance, and after having
chosen a canoe and struck a bargain with its
owner, I installed myself comfortably at the prow
on a carpet, protected by a kind of awning.

The boat left the shore at midnight, bearing
us rapidly towards Srinagar. At the other end of the
bark a Hindu prepared tea for me, and before long
I fell asleep, well satisfied at the thought that my
journey was progressing the while.

I was awakened by the warm caress of the
sun's rays creeping in through the tent, my first
impression of the surrounding scene being an inde-
scribably delightful one. The banks of the river
were green, the distant outlines of the mountain


134 NOTOVITCH CHAPTER TWO

summits snow-covered, the villages picturesque,
and the surface of the water crystalline.

I imbibed with avidity the air, which was
peculiarly rarefied and delicious, listening all the
while to the warbling ofa myriad of birds who were
soaring above in the cloudless serenity of the sky.
Behind me plashed the water, swished by a pole
wielded with ease by a superb woman with mar-
velous eyes, skin browned by the sun, and mien
full of stately indifference.

The dreamy enchantment of the scene had a
mesmeric effect upon me. I forgot the reason for
my presence on the river, and at that moment, in
the excess of my well-being, I had not even the
desire to attain the end of my journey. And yet how
many privations there remained for me to undergo
and dangers to encounter!

The canoe glided rapidly, the landscape ever
unfolding before my eyes, losing itself behind the
confines of the horizon, merging itself and becom-
ing one with the mountains we had passed. Then a
fresh panorama would spread out, seeming to roll
from the sides of the mountains, which every
moment appeared to increase in size. Twilight set
in and I was not yet tired of contemplating this
splendid nature, whose vision had awakened in me
the happiest memories.

As one nears Srinagar, villages embowered in
verdure become more and more numerous. At the
approach of our boat the scanty inhabitants hurried
out to see us, men and women attired alike in long


THE UNKNOWN LIFE OF JESUS CHRIST 12 3

garments reaching to the ground—the former tur-
baned, the latter wearing caps, the children being
in a state of nudity.

At the entrance of the city one sees a line of
barks and houseboats, in which whole families
reside. The summits of the far-off snowcapped
mountains were caressed by the last rays of the
setting sun when we glided between the two rows
of wooden houses which border the banks of the
river at Srinagar.

Business life seems to cease here at sunset.
Thousands of multicolored boats (dunga) and pa-
lanquined barks (bangla) were moored along the
shores, where natives of both sexes, in the primi-
tive costumes of Adam and Eve, were engaged in
the performance of evening ablutions, a sacred rite
far exceeding in their eyes all human prejudices.

On October 20, I awoke in a clean little room
with a bright outlook on the river, which then lay
shimmering in the Kashmirian sunshine. As it is
not my intention to describe here minute details of
my journey, I will not attempt to enumerate the
wonders of this beautiful spot with all its lakes,
enchanting isles, historic palaces, mysterious pa-
godas, and coquettish villages: the latter lie half
hidden in vast gardens, while on all sides rise the
majestic summits of the gigantic Himalayas, cov-
ered as far as eye can see with their white shroud of
the eternal snows. I shall merely note the prepara-
tions I made in view of my further journeying
towards Thibet.


The Case for Issa

magine you are a detective. An unusual case

comes across your desk. You open a yellowed
folder. It isn't exactly a case of a mistaken identity
or a missing person. It is a missing background-
some lost years. And the particulars are spare.

Date of birth unknown. Exact year of birth
also unknown; sometime between 8 and 4 B.C.

Place of birth disputed. Thought to be Beth-
lehem.!

Father, Joseph, a carpenter. Came from a
noble and illustrious line beginning with Abraham
and continuing through Isaac and Jacob to David
the King—then through Solomon to Jacob, the
father of Joseph, husband of Mary.

Human lineage thus established through
paternal descent, though father's paternity vehe-
mently denied by some in favor of doctrine of virgin
birth. One account records him "being, as was
supposed, the son of Joseph" but traces his royal
origin through genealogy of Mary, his mother.?

Adventurous early life. Fled with parents to
Egypt after father had a dream. Returned to


I passed in all six days at Srinagar, making
long excursions in its enchanting environs, exam-
ining the numerous ruins which testify to the
ancient prosperity of the region, and studying the
curious customs of the country.

Kashmir, as well as the other provinces at-
tached to it, such as Baltistan, Ladak, etc., are
vassals of England. Formerly they formed part of
the possessions of the "Lion of the Punjab,” Ranjit
Singh. At his death, the English troops occupied
Lahore, the capital of the Punjab, separated Kash-
mir from the rest of the empire, and ceded it, under
the title of hereditary right and for the sum of
160,000,000 francs, to Ghulab Singh, one of the
intimates of the defunct sovereign—conferring on
him, moreover, the title of maharajah. At the time
of my journey, the reigning maharajah was Pertab
Singh, the grandson of Ghulab, whose residence is
at Jammu on the southern slope of the Himalaya.

The celebrated Happy Valley of Kashmir—
eighty-five miles long and twenty-five miles wide—
was at the height ofits glory and prosperity under the
Grand Mogul, whose court loved to taste here, in
the pavilions on the islets of the lake, the pleasures
ofa rural life. Most of the maharajahs of Hindustan
came here to while away the summer months and at
the same time to take part in the magnificent fetes
given by the Grand Mogul.

Time has now changed the aspect of the
"Happy Valley." It is a happy valley no longer: weeds
cover the limpid surface of the lake, the wild juniper


THE UNKNOWN LIFE OF JESUS CHRIST 12 3

runs riot over the isles, stifling all other vegetation,
and the palaces and pavilions are but grass-grown
ruins, the ghosts of their former grandeur.

The mountains around seem invaded by the
universal gloom and yet to instill a hope that better
times may yet surround their immortal beauties.
The inhabitants, once handsome, intelligent, and
cleanly, have degenerated into a half-idiotic con-
dition. They are both idle and dirty, and the whip
governs them now and not the sword.

The people of Kashmir have had so many
different masters and have been so often exposed to
pillage and inroads of various kinds that with time
they have grown apathetic to all things. They spend
their days near their mangals,* gossiping with their
neighbors, or occupying themselves either with the
minute work of their famous shawls or the execu-
tion of filigree designs in gold or silver.

The Kashmirian women are melancholic,
their features marked with ineffable sadness. Mis-
ery and filth reign everywhere, the fine men and
superb women going about dirty and in rags. The
costumes of both sexes consist, in winter as in
summer, ofa long, full-sleeved shirt made of thick
material. This shirt is not discarded until it is
completely worn out, and never by any chance is it
washed, so that the snowy turbans of the men look
dazzlingly white in comparison with these dirty
grease-stained garments.

A great sadness fills the traveller at the con-
trast formed between the richness and opulence of

*small stoves filled with burning wood


138 NOTOVITCH CHAPTER TWO

the surrounding nature and the miserable condi-
tion of the people, clad in rags.

The capital of the country, Srinagar (the City
of the Sun), or, to call it by the name it bears here
after the country, Kashmir, is situated on the
banks of the Jhelum, along which it extends south-
wards for a distance of five kilometers. Its two-
storied houses, occupied by a population of
132,000 inhabitants, are built of wood and border
both sides of the Indus. The town is not more than
two kilometers wide and everyone lives on the
river, whose banks are united by ten bridges.

Footpaths lead down from the houses to the
water's edge, where all day long ablutions are
performed, baths taken, and the household uten-
sils—consisting generally of two or three copper
pitchers—washed. Part of the inhabitants practice
the Muhammadan religion, two-thirds are Brah-
mans, and there are but few Buddhists to be found
among them.

The time soon drew near for me to make
preparations for my next venture into the unknown.
I laid in a store of tinned goods, some cases of wine,
and other things indispensable for a journey across
so uninhabited a country as Thibet. I had all these
items packed up in boxes, hired ten carriers and a
chicari, bought a horse for my own use, and fixed
the day of my departure for October 27.

To enliven my journey I took with me,
through the kindness of M. Peychaud, a French-
man, the cultivator of the maharajah's vineyards, a


THE UNKNOWN LIFE OF JESUS CHRIST 12 3

splendid dog who had previously travelled across
the Pamir with my friends Bonvalot, Capus, and
Pepin, the well-known explorers.

Having chosen a route which would shorten
my journey by two days, I sent on my coolies at
dawn from the other side of the lake, which
I crossed in a boat, joining them later on at the foot
of the chain of mountains separating the valley of
Srinagar from the gorge of Sind.

Never shall I forget the tortures we endured in
climbing almost on all fours to a summit 3,000
feet high. The coolies were breathless, and every
moment I feared lest I should see one of them roll
down the steep with his burden. My heart ached at
the sad spectacle offered by my poor dog Pamir,
who, with protruding tongue, at last gave a low
moan and sank exhausted to the ground. I forgot
my own extreme fatigue in stroking and encourag-
ing the poor beast, who, as if understanding me,
struggled to his feet, only to fall again a few paces
further on.

Night had come when we reached the summit
of the height, where we threw ourselves greedily
upon the snow in the hope of quenching our thirst.
After a short halt we commenced our descent
through a very thick pine forest, hastening to gain
the village of Hai'ena at the foot of the defile before
the advent of the beasts of prey.

A level, well-kept road leads from Srinagar to
Hai'ena, straight to the north by Ganderbal, where,
after having skirted the Sind and traversed the


133 NOTOVITCH CHAPTER TWO

superbly fertile country extending as far as Kangra,
it turns abruptly to the east. Six miles further on it
approaches the village of Hai'ena, whither I had
directed my steps by a more direct route across the
pass already mentioned, which considerably short-
ened for me both time and distance.

My first step in the unknown was marked by an
incident, causing us all to pass a mauvais quart
d'heure * The defile of Sind, sixty miles long, is
above all famed for its inhospitable inmates, among
whom are found panthers, tigers, leopards, black
bears, wolves, and jackals. As if for our express
discomfiture, the snow had just covered with its
white carpet the heights of the chain, thus obliging
these formidable and carnivorous inhabitants to
descend a little lower to seek shelter in their dens.

We followed in silence a narrow path in the
darkness, winding between ancient firs and birches,
the sound of our footsteps alone breaking through
the calm of the night. Suddenly, in close proximity
to us, a terrible howling broke upon the silence of
the wood. Our little band came to an abrupt
standstill. "A panther!" whispered my servant, with
voice trembling with fear, the other coolies remain-
ing motionless and as if riveted to the spot.

At this juncture I remembered that during the
ascent, having felt tired out, I had entrusted my
revolver to one of the carriers and my Winchester
rifle to another. I now felt a sharp pang of regret at
having parted with either, asking in a low voice

where the man was to whom I had given the rifle.
*[bad quarter hour; an uncomfortable though brief experience—ED.)



THE UNKNOWN LIFE OF JESUS CHRIST 12 3

The howls had become more and more vio-
lent, awakening the echoes of the silent wood,
when suddenly a dull thud was heard, like the fall
of a body. Almost instantaneously we were thrilled
with the noise of a struggle and the cry ofa man in
agony, mingled with the hoarse howling of some
famished beast.

"Sahib, take the gun," I heard close to me.
I feverishly seized hold of my rifle, but it was only
peine perdue* for I could not see two steps before
me. A fresh cry followed by a smothered howling
gave me a slight clue to the scene of the struggle and
I groped my way on, divided between my desire "to
kill a panther" and to save, if possible, the life of the
victim whose cry had reached our ears, and the
horrible fear of being lacerated in my turn.

My followers were all paralyzed with fright,
and it was only after five long minutes that
I succeeded—remembering the dislike wild beasts
have for fire—in inducing one of them to strike a
match and set light to a heap of brushwood. We
then saw about ten steps ahead of us, stretched out
on the ground, one of our coolies, whose limbs had
been literally torn to pieces by the claws ofa superb
panther who, standing motionless, yet held a por-
tion of flesh in his jaws. At its side gaped a case of
wine that had been completely broken open.

Hardly had I time to raise the rifle to my
shoulder when the panther reared and, turning
upon us, let go a part of its horrible meal. For one

instant_it seemed on the point of springing upon
*[to no avail—ED. ]



142 NOTOVITCH CHAPTER TWO

me, when suddenly it wheeled round and, uttering
a howl enough to freeze the blood in one's veins,
sprang into the midst of the thicket and disap-
peared before our eyes.

My coolies, whom abject fear had kept pros-
trated all this time on the ground, now recovered
somewhat from their fright. Keeping in readiness
bundles of twigs and matches, we hurried on in the
hope of gaining Hai'ena, abandoning the remains
of the unfortunate Hindu for fear of becoming
victims to a similar fate.

An hour later we had left the forest and
entered the plain. There I had my tent pitched
under a thickly foliaged plane tree, ordering at the
same time a large fire to be lit—the only means we
possessed of keeping at bay the wild beasts whose
terrific howlings came from all directions. My dog,
with drooping tail, had kept close to me all the
time in the forest; but once under the tent, he
suddenly regained his valor and all night long he
barked without cessation, not however once daring
to venture his nose outside.

The night for me was an awful one. I spent it
rifle in hand, listening to the concert of fearful
howls whose funereal echoes filled the defile. Sev-
eral panthers approached our bivouac, attracted by
Pamir's barking, but the fire kept them off and they
made no attempts against us.

I had left Srinagar at the head of eleven
coolies, four of whom were laden with so many
cases of wine and stores, four with my personal


THE UNKNOWN LIFE OF JESUS CHRIST 12 3

belongings, one with my firearms, another with
various utensils, while the province of the last of
all was to act as scout. This individual bore the title
of "chicari," which signifies "he who accompanies
the hunter to pick up the game.”

I discharged him after our night in the defile
because of his extreme cowardice and absolute
ignorance of the country, and at the same time
I gave six of the coolies notice to quit, retaining
only four with me and replacing the others on
arrival at the village of Gund by horses. Later on
I took another chicari into my service, who ful-
filled the role of interpreter and who had been
highly recommended to me by M. Peychaud.

How beautiful is nature in the gorge of Sind
and how justly well beloved by all sportsmen!
Besides wild beasts, stags are to be met, hinds, wild
sheep, and a great variety of birds, among which
may be especially mentioned the golden, red, and
snow-white pheasants, large partridges, and im-
mense eagles.

The villages situated along the Sind are not
conspicuous for their dimensions. Generally they
consist of from ten to twenty cottages of miserable
aspect, their inhabitants going about in rags and
tatters. The cattle belong to a very small breed.

Having passed the river at Sumbal, I stopped
near the village of Gund to procure horses. When-
ever it happened that these useful quadrupeds
were refused me, I always began playing about
with my whip, which had the instantaneous result


144 NOTOVITCH CHAPTER TWO

of inspiring obedience and respect, while for the
rest a little money procured extreme servility and
the immediate execution of my smallest orders.

The stick and the rupee are the true sover-
eigns of the East. Without them the Grand Mogul
himself would have been of no importance.

Before long, night fell and I hastened to cross
the defile which separates the villages of Gogangan
and Sonamarg. The road is in a very bad condition
and infested by wild beasts, who come out at night
in search of prey, penetrating even into the vil-
lages. Panthers abound and, for fear of their rav-
ages, few people dare take up their abode in this
district, beautiful and fertile though it is.

At the outlet of the defile, near the village of
Tchokodar or Thajiwas, I distinguished in the
semi-obscurity two dark forms crossing the road.
They turned out to be a couple of bears, followed
by a young one.

As I was alone with my servant at the time (we
having gone before the caravan), I did not feel in a
particular hurry to confront them with only one
rifle. My sportsman's instinct, however, had be-
come so strongly developed by my long excursions
among the mountains that I could not resist the
temptation ofa rencontre. To jump from my horse,
aim, fire and, without even marking the result, to
quickly reload my gun was the affair of a second.

At this juncture one of the two bears was on
the point of bounding upon me, when a second
shot caused him to turn tail and disappear. Holding


THE UNKNOWN LIFE OF JESUS CHRIST 12 3

my gun reloaded in my hand, I then approached
with circumspection the spot I had aimed at, to find
there the other bear lying on its flank with the little
cub gambolling beside it. Another shot laid the
young one low, whereupon my servant hastened to
skin both animals, their fur being superb and as
black as jet.

This encounter lost us two hours and night had
completely fallen by the time I pitched my tent near
Tchokodar, which place I left at dawn to gain Baltal
by following the course of the river Sind. At this spot
abruptly terminates the exquisite landscape of the
"golden prairie" with a village which bears the same
name (Sona 'gold' and marg 'prairie'). The height of
Zoji La* now supervenes, an abrupt acclivity of
11,500 feet, beyond which the whole country
assumes a severe and inhospitable aspect.

Before Baltal my sporting escapades came to
an end; from that time I only met with wild goats.
Had I wished for an expedition, it would have been
necessary to leave the high road and to penetrate
into the very heart of the mountains. I had neither
the time nor the inclination, so I tranquilly con-
tinued my route towards Ladak.

A violent transition is effected in passing from
the smiling nature and fine population of Kashmir
to the arid and sullen rocks and the beardless and
deformed inhabitants of Ladak. The country into
which I had just penetrated is at an altitude of
11,000 to 12,000 feet; only at Kargil the level
descends to 8,000 feet.

*[La means “pass."—ED.)



J 4 ELIZABETH CLARE PROPHET CHAPTER ONE

Nazareth, or thereabouts, an unspecified number
of years later.

By this time you realize what you might be
getting into. But it doesn't add up. Why a file on
Jesus? You read on.

At about age thirty, began a mission. Was
baptized by a cousin, John. Traveled extensively
with a band of twelve disciples for about three years.
Preached, healed the sick, raised the dead. Was
framed by Jewish high priest Caiaphas and Sanhe-
drin. Sentenced by Roman procurator Pontius
Pilate against his better judgment. Crucified by four
Roman soldiers. Taken down from cross and laid in
tomb by Joseph of Arimathea and Nicodemus.

Orthodox position: Rose from the dead on the
third day.’ Taught disciples forty days. Then dis-
appeared from their sight in "a cloud." Ascended
into heaven and sat on the right hand of God.

Contradicted by second-century tradition that
he spent many years on earth after resurrection.‘
Church Father Irenaeus asserts he lived at least ten
to twenty years after crucifixion:

On completing His thirtieth year He suf-
fered, being in fact still a young man, and
who had by no means attained to advanced
age. Now, that the first stage of early life
embraces thirty years, and that this extends
onwards to the fortieth year, every one will
admit; but from the fortieth and fiftieth year
a man begins to decline towards old age,


146 NOTOVITCH CHAPTER TWO

The acclivity of Zoji La is very rugged; one
has to climb an almost perpendicular wall. In
certain places the path winds over projectures in
the rock not more than a meter wide, the eye
becoming dizzy at the sight of the unfathomable
abyss below. At such points as these, heaven pre-
serve the traveller from a false step!

There is one spot where a bridge has been
formed by inserting long beams into holes in the
rock and covering the same with a layer of earth.
Brr!... At the thought that a stone rolling from the
side of the mountain or that a too great oscillation
of the beams might precipitate the earth into the
abyss—and with the earth the unfortunate traveller
who had hazarded his life upon it—my heart stood
still more than once during my perilous journey.

Our dangers overcome, we halted in a valley
where we prepared to pass the night near a post-
carrier's hut, a spot which from its close proximity
to the ice and snow was not rendered particularly
attractive.

Beyond Baltal the distances are determined by
means of daks—that is to say, post stations for the
mail service. They are low huts, situated at seven
kilometers’ distance one from another, a guard
being left in permanent charge of each.

The postal service between Kashmir and Thi-
bet is still worked on very primitive lines. Letters are
enclosed in a leather bag and given to a carrier. This
individual, who carries on his back a basket con-
taining several similar bags, rapidly covers the seven


THE UNKNOWN LIFE OF JESUS CHRIST 12 3

kilometers assigned to him. At the end of his
journey he makes over his burden to another carrier,
who in his turn accomplishes his task in identical
manner. Thus letters are carried once a week from
Kashmir to Thibet and vice versa, neither rains nor
snows hindering their transmission.

For each course a letter-carrier is paid six
annas (tenpence), the sum usually given to carriers
of merchandise. My coolies only asked a similar
recompense for carrying burdens at least ten times
as heavy. One's heart aches at the sight of these
pale, tired-looking officials. But what can one do?
It is the custom of the country. Tea is brought from
China in a similar way, this system of transporta-
tion being both rapid and economical.

Near the village of Matayan I came again
upon the caravan of Yarkandiano whom I had
promised to accompany on their journey. They
had recognized me from afar and at once begged
me to examine one of their band who had fallen
ill. I found the poor fellow writhing in the agonies
of intense fever. Wringing my hands in sign of
despair, I pointed heavenwards, thus endeavoring
to make them understand that their comrade's
condition was beyond human aid or science and
that God alone could save him.

As these people travelled by slow stages, I was
obliged to leave them in order to arrive the same
evening at Dras, which is situated at the bottom ofa
valley near a river bearing the same name. Near Dras
stands a little fort of very ancient construction —


148 NOTOVITCH CHAPTER TWO

freshly whitewashed—under the guard of three
Sikhs of the maharajah's army.

Here my domicile was the posthouse, which is
the only station ofa single telegraphic line commu-
nicating between Srinagar and the interior of the
Himalayas. From this time I was no longer able to
erect my tent of an evening but had to take shelter in
the caravansaries, which, although horribly dirty,
were yet well warmed within by enormous logs of
lighted wood.

From Dras to Kargil the country is dull and
monotonous, if one excepts the marvelous sunrises
and sunsets and beautiful moonlight effects. Apart
from these the road is flat, endless, and bristling
with dangers.

Kargil is the principal town of the district and
the residence of the governor of the country. Its site
is very picturesque. Two streams of water, the Suru
and the Wakka, clatter noisily over the rocks and
stones, issuing from their different defiles to unite
in forming the river Suru, on whose banks rise the
mud constructions of Kargil.

At the break of day, provided with fresh
horses, I continued my route, entering Ladak, or
Little Thibet. Here I crossed an oscillating bridge
composed, as all those of Kashmir, of two long
beams, the ends of which were supported upon the
banks, the whole being covered with a layer of
fagots and little sticks and giving the illusion of a
suspension bridge.


THE UNKNOWN LIFE OF JESUS CHRIST 12 3

Soon afterwards I was leisurely climbing a little
plateau, which covers the route for a distance of two
kilometers before descending into the narrow val-
ley of Wakka, dotted with villages, of which Pash-
kyum, on the left bank, is the most picturesque.

Here my feet trod Buddhist soil. The inhabi-
tants are simple and good-natured; they seem to
have no knowledge of what we Europeans call
squabbles. Women are somewhat rare. Those
I encountered were distinguished from the women
I had previously seen in India and Kashmir by the
air of gaiety and prosperity apparent on their
countenances.

How could it be otherwise, since each woman
of this country has on an average from three to five
husbands and in the most legitimate manner in the
world? Polyandry flourishes here. However large a
family may be, there is never more than one
woman in it. And if it does not exceed three
persons, a bachelor may join it by contributing to
the general expenses.

As a rule, the men are of feeble appearance,
rather bent, and they seldom live to old age.
During my journey in Ladak I did not meet one
white-haired old man.

The road from Kargil to the center of Ladak
has a much livelier aspect than the one I had just
traversed, it being brightened by numerous ham-
lets, though trees and verdure of any kind are
extremely rare.


150 NOTOVITCH CHAPTER TWO

Twenty miles from Kargil, at the issue of the
defile formed by the rapid current of the Wakka, is
the little village of Shergol, in whose center rise
three brightly painted chapels—t’horthenes* to
give them the name they bear in Thibet.

Below, near the river, stretch out heaps of
stones massed together and forming long, broad
walls upon which have been thrown in apparent
disorder many flat, varied-colored stones engraved
with all kinds of prayers in Ourd, Sanskrit, Thi-
betan, and even Arabic characters. Unknown to
my coolies, I succeeded in carrying away a few of
these stones, which are now to be seen in the
palace of the Trocadero. From Shergol one meets
at every step with these kind of oblong jetties.

Next morning at sunrise, provided with fresh
horses, I resumed my journey, halting near the
monastery (gonpa) of Mulbekh, which appears as
if glued to the side of an isolated rock. Below it is
the hamlet of Wakka, not far off from which is to
be seen another rock of most singular appearance
which seems to have been placed in its present
position by human hands. On its side has been
carved a Buddha several meters long, while it is
further ornamented with several prayer girouettes.

These are kinds of wooden cylinders draped
with materials yellow and white and attached to staves
sunk vertically into the ground. The least breath
of wind sets them revolving. The individual who

*A t’horthene is a small mortuary chapel or memorial of the dead.



THE UNKNOWN LIFE OF JESUS CHRIST 12 3

originally placed them on the rock is exempt from
the obligation of all prayer, for all that a believer
could possibly ask of God is inscribed upon them.

Seen from a distance, this whitewashed mon-
astery has a most weird effect, standing as it does
with its skirted and revolving prayer wheels in strong
relief against the gray background of the hills.

I left my horses at the hamlet of Wakka and,
followed by my interpreter, walked towards the
gonpa, to which access is given by a narrow stair-
way cut in the rock. At the top we were received by
a portly lama—with the characteristically scanty
beard of the Thibetan people—whose plainness
was only exceeded by his affability.

The costume he wore consisted of a yellow
frock and a cap of the same color with cloth ears.
In his right hand he held a copper prayer girouette,
which from time to time, without in any way
interrupting our conversation, he set in motion.
This action constituted an incessant prayer, com-
municated to the atmosphere in order that it should
the more quickly be wafted to heaven.

We crossed a suite of low-ceilinged rooms
whose walls, lined with shelves, displayed various
images of Buddha of different dimensions made
from all kinds of materials and covered with thick
layers of dust. We came out at last upon an open
terrace, from which the eye rested upon the sur-
rounding waste of inhospitable country strewn with
grayish rocks and traversed by a solitary road, the


two extremities of which were lost in the confines of
the horizon.

Here we sat down, being at once served with a
beer made from hops, brewed in the monastery
itself, and called tchang. This beverage rapidly
imparts embonpoint to the monks, which is con-
sidered as a sign of particular favor from heaven.

The Thibetan language is spoken here; its
origin is most obscure. One thing, however, is
certain, and that is that a king of Thibet, a con-
temporary of Mahomet, undertook the creation of
a universal language for all the followers of Bud-
dha. With this intent he simplified the Sanskrit
grammar and composed an alphabet containing a
vast number of letters, thus laying the foundation
of a language, the pronunciation of which is as
easy as its writing is complicated and difficult. In
order to represent a sound, no less than eight
characters have to be employed.

All the modern literature of Thibet is written
in this language, which is only spoken in its purity
in Ladak and eastern Thibet. In all the other parts
of the country, dialects are used, formed by a
mixture of this mother tongue with different idioms
taken from the neighboring peoples in one region
or another.

In the ordinary life of the Thibetan, two
languages are in use, one of which is absolutely
incomprehensible to the women, while the other is
spoken by the entire nation. It is only in the gonpas
that the Thibetan language is found in its integrity.


THE UNKNOWN LIFE OF JESUS CHRIST —= 12 3

The lamas much prefer the visits of Europeans
to those of Mussulmans. I asked an explanation of
this from my host, who replied as follows: "Mussul-
mans have no point of contact with our religion.
Quite recently, in their victorious campaign, they
converted by force a part of our coreligionists to
Islamism. All our efforts are centered in endeavor-
ing to bring back these Mussulman descendants of
Buddhists to the way of the true God.

"As regards the Europeans, that is quite an-
other matter. Not only do they profess the essential
principles of monotheism, but they have almost as
much title to be considered worshippers of Buddha
as the lamas of Thibet themselves.

"The only error of the Christians has been
that, after having adopted the great doctrines of
Buddha, they should have completely severed
themselves from him in creating for themselves a
different Dalai Lama, ours alone having the divine
gift of seeing face-to-face the majesty of Buddha
and the power of serving as an intermediary be-
tween earth and heaven."

"Who is this Dalai Lama of the Christians
about whom you speak?" I asked. "We have a ‘Son
of God,’ to whom we address fervent prayers and to
whom we have recourse that he should intercede
for us with our one and indivisible God."

"It is not of him I speak, sahib. We also respect
the one whom you recognize as Son of the one
God-—not that we see in him an only Son, but a
perfect being, elect from among all. The spirit of


154 NOTOVITCH CHAPTER TWO

Buddha was indeed incarnate in the sacred person
of Issa, who, without aid from fire or sword, has
spread knowledge of our great and true religion
throughout the world. I speak rather of your earthly
Dalai Lama, him to whom you have given the title
of'Father of the Church.’ This is a great sin; may
it be forgiven the flocks who have gone astray."
Saying which, the lama hastened to turn his prayer
girouette.

I now understood that the allusion he had
made had been to the Pope.

"You tell me that a son of Buddha, Issa, has
spread your religion over the earth. Who then
is he?"

At this question the lama opened his eyes wide,
looked at me with astonishment and, pronouncing
some words my interpreter could not catch, held
forth somewhat unintelligibly as follows:

"Issa is a great prophet, one of the first after
the twenty-two Buddhas. He is greater than any
one of all the Dalai Lamas, for he constitutes part
of the spirituality of our Lord. It is he who has
enlightened you, who has brought back within the
pale of religion the souls of the frivolous, and who
has allowed each human being to distinguish be-
tween good and evil. His name and his acts are
recorded in our sacred writings. And in reading of
his wondrous existence, passed in the midst of an
erring and wayward people, we weep at the horri-
ble sin of the pagans who, after having tortured
him, put him to death."


THE UNKNOWN LIFE OF JESUS CHRIST 12 3

I was struck by this recital of the lama's. The
prophet Issa, his sufferings and death, our Christian
Dalai Lama, the Buddhists recognizing Christian-
ity—all these points made me think more and more
of Jesus Christ, and I begged my interpreter to be
scrupulous in not omitting a single word the lama
might say.

"Where are these writings now to be found?
And by whom were they originally written down?"
I asked.

"The principal scrolls, whose compilation was
effected in India and Nepal at different epochs,
proportional to the events, are to be found at Lassa
to the number of several thousands. In some of the
chief monasteries copies are to be met with, made
by the lamas during their sojourns at Lassa at
various times and presented by them afterwards to
their cloisters in remembrance of their pilgrimages
to the home of the great master, our Dalai Lama."

"But you yourselves, have you no copies relat-
ing to the prophet Issa?"

"We have none. Our convent is not an impor-
tant one, and since its formation our successive
lamas have only had a few hundred manuscripts at
their disposal. The great cloisters own thousands of
them. But these are sacred things, which will be
shown you nowhere."

Our conversation lasted a few minutes longer,
when I left for the encampment, meditating all the
time on the lama's narrative. Issa, a prophet of the
Buddhists! But how could he have been? Of Jewish


THE LOST YEARS OF JESUS 2 3

which our Lord possessed while He still
fulfilled the office of a Teacher, even as the
Gospel and all the elders testify; those who
were conversant in Asia with John, the dis-
ciple of the Lord, [affirming] that John con-
veyed to them that information. [Against
Heresies, c. 180]

View supported by third-century Gnostic text
Pistis Sophia:

It came to pass, when Jesus had risen from
the dead, that he passed eleven years dis-
coursing with his disciples and instructing
them 6

Impact of his life and teachings incalculable.
Sought to effect change by purifying men's hearts.
Called the greatest revolutionary.

Story told in various forms in New Testament
and apocryphal writings. Followers, now 1.4 bil-
lion, called Christians.’ Largest of all faiths.

Christian nations now culturally, economi-
cally, and politically dominant. All human history
divided by his birth—B.C., A.D. Suggests his com-
ing is the pivot of history.

You take a deep breath and exhale slowly. This
is no small case. An investigation into the past of
one of the most influential persons in history. You
look up from your desk, past the typewriter to a
calendar on the wall. It is an old, old case. You
return to the file. It is full of unanswered questions.


156 NOTOVITCH CHAPTER TWO

origin, he lived in Palestine and in Egypt, and the
Gospels contain no word, no allusion to the part Bud-
dhism might have played in the education of Jesus.

I determined to visit every convent in Thibet
in the hope of gleaning ampler information con-
cerning the prophet Issa and perhaps of coming
across copies of the records relating to his life.

Almost without perceiving it, we crossed the
pass of Namika at an altitude of 13,000 feet,
whence we descended into the valley of the river
Sangeluma. After having turned southwards, we
reached Kharbu, leaving behind us on the other
bank numerous villages, among which Chagdoom,
on the summit of a rock, has an extremely pictur-
esque site.

The houses are white, two or three-storied, and
have a very cheerful aspect—a characteristic they
share in common with all the villages of Ladak. A
European making the round of Kashmir soon loses
all trace of his national style of architecture; while
in Ladak, on the contrary, he is agreeably surprised
at the sight of trim little houses with casements,
similar to those of any provincial town of Europe.

Near Kharbu, on two perpendicular rocks, the
ruins of a little town or village are to be seen. A
storm and earthquake, it is said, demolished its walls
which, however, as regards solidity, seem to have
left nothing to be desired.

The next day I traversed yet another station
and crossed the Fotu La, 13,500 feet, on the
summit of which is built a little t'horthene.


THE UNKNOWN LIFE OF JESUS CHRIST 12 3

Thence, following the completely dry bed of a
torrent, I descended to the hamlet of Lamayuru,
which appears unexpectedly before the eyes of the
traveller. A convent, clinging to the side of an
isolated rock and maintaining its equilibrium in
miraculous fashion, dominates the village.

Staircases are unknown in this monastery. One
mounts from one story to another by aid of ropes,
outside communication being effected through a
labyrinth of passages and corridors. Below the con-
vent, whose windows remind one of great birds’
nests, is a little inn which offers to the traveller a few
uninviting rooms.

At once after my arrival here and as I was
preparing to stretch myself out on a carpet, my
apartment was suddenly invaded by a number of
yellow-frocked monks who pestered me with ques-
tions as to whence I came, the object of my
journey, etc., etc., finally inviting me to ascend to
the monastery.

In spite of my fatigue, I accepted their invita-
tion and began to climb with them a steep path cut
in the rock, so encumbered with prayer cylinders or
wheels that every moment I touched and set them
whirling. These pious objects had been placed
there for this purpose and to prevent the passersby
from losing time in their prayers, as if the business
of their day was too absorbing to allow of leisure for
devotion.

Many pious Buddhists utilize the currents of
their rivers with this view. I have seen a whole row


158 NOTOVITCH CHAPTER TWO

of cylinders, provided with their usual formulas,
placed along a river bank in such a way that they
were kept in continual motion by the water, thus
exempting their proprietors from the obligation of
prayer.

Having reached our destination, I sat down on
a bench in a dimly lighted room, the walls of
which were decorated with the inevitable images of
Buddha as well as by books and girouettes, my
loquacious hosts at once beginning to explain to
me the signification of each object.

"And these books you have here," I asked
them, "relate, no doubt, to religion?"

"Yes, sahib. They are volumes treating on the
first and most important rites of public life. We
possess several parts of the words of Buddha, con-
secrated to the great and indivisible divine Being
and to all that has come forth from his hands."

"Among these books is there not some record
of the prophet Issa?"

"No," replied the monk. "We only possess a
few principal treatises relating to the observance of
the religious rites. As for the biographies of our
saints, they are collected in Lassa. Even some of
the most important of our convents have not yet
had time to procure them. Before coming to this
gonpa I lived for several years in a great monas-
tery on the other side of Ladak, and there I saw
thousands of books and scrolls copied at differ-
ent times by the lamas of the cloister."

Having interrogated the monks at still greater


THE UNKNOWN LIFE OF JESUS CHRIST 12 3

length, I learned that the convent in question was
near Leh. My repeated inquiries, however, re-
sulted in exciting their suspicions, and it was with
undisguised pleasure they reconducted me below,
where I retired to rest after a light repast and having
charged my Hindu to judiciously question the
younger lamas of the gonpa as to the name of the
monastery where their chief had lived before his
nomination to Lamayuru.

Up at sunrise next morning, I continued my
journey, the Hindu having informed me that he
had been unable to extract any information from
the lamas, who were evidently on their guard.
I will not stop here to describe the monastic life of
these convents, it being much the same in all the
cloisters of Ladak. I saw subsequently the cele-
brated monastery of Leh, to which visit I shall refer
with many details later on.

At Lamayuru commences a steep declivity
which, through a narrow and somber defile, leads
towards the Indus. Without having any idea of the
dangers which this descent presented, I sent my
coolies on in advance and set out along a path
between hills of brown clay—smooth enough at its
commencement but soon leading into a kind of
narrow and obscure cutting, winding as a corniche
along the side of the mountain and overlooking a
frightful precipice.

The way was so narrow that ifa rider had met
me, we should certainly never have been able to pass
each other. All description would be inadequate to


160 NOTOVITCH CHAPTER TWO

convey an idea of the grandeur and wild beauty of
this gorge, the crests of whose summits dart up-
wards towards the sky.

At certain points, the passage became so con-
tracted that from my saddle I could with my whip
touch the opposite rock, while at others death
seemed to stare me in the face from the depths of
the abyss below. It was too late, however, to think
of dismounting. I could only regret the rashness of
the step I had taken and proceed as best I could.

This defile is in reality an enormous crevasse,
due to some formidable upheaval of the earth,
which must have violently separated two immense
masses of granite rock. At the bottom of it I could
see a scarcely perceptible white streak. This was an
impetuous torrent whose dull roar filled the gorge
with mysterious sound. Above me wound a narrow
ribbon of blue—the only portion of the celestial
vault visible between the rocks.

The sight of this majestic nature was in itself
an intense pleasure. At the same time, the death-
like stillness, the awful silence of the mountains
broken only by the melancholy dashing of the
waters beneath filled me with sadness.

For a distance of eight miles I had experi-
enced these sensations, pleasant and at the same
time depressing, when at a sudden turn to the right
I passed out of the defile and into a valley circled
by rocks, whose summits were reflected in the
Indus. On a bank of the river stands the little
fortress of Khalsi, a famous stronghold dating from


THE UNKNOWN LIFE OF JESUS CHRIST 12 3

the Mussulman invasions, near to which is the
high road leading from Kashmir to Thibet.

After having crossed the Indus over a kind of
suspension bridge which leads to the door of the
fortress, I traversed the valley and then the village
of Khalsi, being anxious to pass the night in the
hamlet of Snourly situated in the valley of the
Indus and constructed in terraces which descend to
the river.

The two following days I travelled tranquilly
and without any difficulties to overcome along the
banks of the Indus through a picturesque country
which brought me to Leh, the capital of Ladak.

In crossing the little valley of Saspoula, near
the village which bears its name, I came across, for
a distance of several kilometers in the neighbor-
hood, stonemounds and t'horthenes. I also passed
two monasteries, from one of which floated the
French flag. Later on I learned that a French
engineer had presented it to the monks, who thus
made use of it as a decoration.

I passed the night at Saspoula, not forgetting
to visit the cloisters, where for the tenth time I saw
the dust-covered images of Buddha, the flags and
banners heaped in a corner, hideous masks lying
on the ground, books and rolls of parchment piled
up without any order, and the usual display of
prayer cylinders.

The lamas seem to experience particular plea-
sure in displaying these objects. They appear to be
parading treasures of great importance and are


162 NOTOVITCH CHAPTER TWO

perfectly indifferent as to the amount of interest
the spectator may be taking in them. Their idea
seems to be, "We must show all we possess in the
hope that the sight alone of so many sacred things
will force the traveller to believe in the divine
grandeur of the human soul."

Concerning the prophet Issa, the same ac-
counts were given me as I| had heard before, and
I was informed what I already knew—that the
volumes which could enlighten me about him were
at Lassa and that only the most important monas-
teries possessed copies of the same. I thought no
more of passing the Karakorum but only of finding
this history, which might perhaps give additional
light to the inner life of the best of men and amplify
at the same time the somewhat vague information
which the Gospels give us respecting him.

A little before Leh, at the entrance of the
valley which bears its name, the road passes near a
lonely rock, on the summit of which is built a fort
flanked by two towers (without a garrison) and the
little convent named Pintak.

A mountain 10,500 feet high protects the
entrance of Thibet. The road then leads abruptly
northwards in the direction of Leh, which at a
distance of six miles from Pintak stands at a height
of 11,500 feet at the bases of immense granite
columns whose summits, varying from 18,000 to
19,000 feet, are covered with the eternal snows.

The town itself, girdled by stunted aspen
trees, rises in a succession of terraces dominated by


THE UNKNOWN LIFE OF JESUS CHRIST 12 3

an old fort and the palace of the ancient sovereigns
of Ladak. Towards evening I made my entrance
into Leh, taking up my quarters in a bungalow
especially constructed for the use of Europeans
who come from India during the hunting season.

LADAK

Ladak originally formed part of Great Thibet.
The frequent hordes of invaders from the north
who traversed this country to conquer Kashmir
and the wars of which it was the theater not only
reduced it to misery, but had also the result of
depriving it—passing as it did from the hands of
one conqueror to another—of the political domin-
ion of Lassa.

The Mussulmans, who took possession at a
remote epoch of Kashmir and Ladak, converted by
force the feeble inhabitants of Little Thibet to
Islamism. The political existence of Ladak termi-
nated with the annexation by the Sikhs of this
country to Kashmir, which permitted the Lada-
kians to return to their ancient beliefs.

Two-thirds of the inhabitants profited by these
occurrences to reerect their gonpas and to return to
their former mode of living. The Baltistans alone
remained Mussulman Shiites, to which sect the
conquerors of the country had belonged. Notwith-
standing this, however, they have preserved only a
very vague semblance of Islamism, which is chiefly
revealed in their customs and their practice of
polygamy. Several lamas informed me that they


157 NOTOVITCH CHAPTER TWO

had not yet given up hope of bringing them back
someday to the faith of their ancestors.

In a religious sense, Ladak is subservient to
Lassa, the capital of Thibet and residence of the
Dalai Lama. It is at Lassa that the principal khou-
toukhtes, or supreme-lamas, are elected, as well as
the chogzots, or administrators. Politically it is
under the authority of the maharajah of Kashmir,
who is represented by a governor.

The inhabitants of Ladak belong to the Chi-
nese-Touranian race and are divided into Ladakians
and Tchampas. The Ladakians lead a sedentary
existence, build villages along their narrow valleys,
live in two-storied houses which they keep care-
fully, and cultivate large plots of land.

They are exceedingly ugly, of short stature,
lean, and bent, with small heads, narrow receding
foreheads, prominent cheekbones, and the beady
black eyes of the Mongolian race, flat noses, large
thin-lipped mouths, weak, scantily bearded chins,
and hollow cheeks, heavily furrowed with wrin-
kles. Add to all this a shaven head, from which
depends a diminutive plait, and you will have the
general type not only of the inhabitants of Ladak,
but of the whole of Thibet.

The women are of equally small stature and
have the same prominent cheekbones. But they are
of a much more robust constitution, and sympa-
thetic smiles brighten their faces. They have gay and
even dispositions and are much given to merriment.

The severity of the climate precludes the


THE UNKNOWN LIFE OF JESUS CHRIST 12 3

Ladakians from wearing rich or many-colored gar-
ments. Their shirts are of simple gray linen and
coarse cloth which they manufacture themselves;
and their pantaloons, which descend as far as the
knee, are made of the same material.

People of means still wear the choga (a kind of
overcoat). In winter a fur cap with earflaps is worn,
while in summer the head is protected by a cloth
cap, the peak of which folds over on one side.
Their shoes are made of felt covered with leather,
and from their waistbands hang a whole arsenal of
small objects—needle cases, knives, penholders,
inkpots, tobacco pouches, pipes, and the inevitable
prayer girouettes.

The Thibetans are, as a rule, of such an idle
disposition that a plait of hair which has become
loose is not replaited before a space of at least three
months, while a shirt is not discarded till it falls
from the body in rags. The overcoat they wear is
always dirty and generally marked on the back by a
large oily stain left by their plait, which is carefully
greased every day. They take a bath once a year,
and then not from their own free will but because
they are so compelled by the law. For this reason it
will be easily understood that their immediate
vicinity is to be avoided.

The women, on the contrary, are great lovers
of cleanliness and order. They wash themselves
daily and on the smallest pretext. Their costume
consists of a short and spotless chemisette, which
hides the dazzling whiteness of their skin, and a red


J6 ELIZABETH CLARE PROPHET CHAPTER ONE

No record of his existence made during his
life. If made, did not survive. Nothing he may
have written survived either.

No record of what he looked like: height,
weight, color of hair or eyes. No distinguishing
marks.®

Few details about his childhood. Little infor-
mation about his family and home life. May have
moved to Memphis, Egypt, shortly after his birth
and lived there with his family three years.’
Legends from the Isles say his great-uncle Joseph of
Arimathea took him to Glastonbury as a youth.
May have studied there.!°

Most puzzling of all: aside from Glastonbury
traditions and apocryphal writings," no record of
any kind about where he was or what he was doing
from age twelve to thirty—a period called "the lost
years of Jesus." Generally thought to have been in
Palestine, in or about Nazareth, during that time,
occupied as a carpenter. Facts to support this
hypothesis: none.

You leave your desk, walk to the window and
look out. You're thinking, "How do cases like this
find me? No witnesses. Maybe no solid clues.
Chance of cooperation and pay negligible."

It's night. The city is asleep. You're tempted to
close the file and send it back. But you're intrigued:
Where was Jesus during the lost years? You walk to
your desk, pick up the file, and go out into the dark
looking for a lead.


UsWOA UeIyepe’]



THE UNKNOWN LIFE OF JESUS CHRIST 12 3

jacket draped over their well-rounded shoulders—
the hem of which is tucked inside of knickerbockers
of red and green cloth. This latter original garment
is worn puffed up as a protection against the cold.
Red broidered half-boots are worn, lined with fur;
and an indoor costume is completed by a wide,
many-pleated cloth skirt.

The hair is worn tightly plaited, while to the
head is attached with pins large pieces of loose
cloth, something after the fashion of the women of
Italy. Beneath this headdress are suspended in
bizarre fashion various brightly colored pebbles as
well as coins and fragments of carved metals.

The ears are covered with flaps of cloth or fur,
and sheepskins are worn, protecting the back
alone. Poor women content themselves with ordi-
nary skins of animals, while women of position
don proper pelisses of red cloth, broidered with
gold fringes.

Whether out walking in the streets or calling
on friends, the women invariably carry on their
backs conical-shaped baskets, the small bases of
which are turned towards the ground, filled with
peat, which constitutes the chief fuel of the country.

Every woman possesses a certain amount of
money which is hers by right, and this she gen-
erally spends on jewelry, buying at small cost large
pieces of turquoise which she adds to the various
ornaments of her coiffure.

The Ladakian woman enjoys a social status
envied by all the women of the East, for not only is


161 NOTOVITCH CHAPTER TWO

she free but held in great respect. With the excep-
tion of a small amount of field labor, she passes the
greater part of her time visiting. And here let it be
remarked that idle gossip is to her a thing unknown.

The settled population of Ladak devotes itself
to agriculture, but the inhabitants possess so little
land (the allotment of each rarely exceeding ten
acres) that the income they draw from it is not
sufficient to defray either the payment of the taxes
or the bare necessaries of life. Manual labor is
generally despised. The lowest grade of society
bears the name of Bern, and an alliance with one
of their body is carefully avoided.

During the leisure hours left from their labor
in the fields, the inhabitants give themselves up to
hunting the Thibetan goat, whose wool is held in
high esteem in India. The poorest among the popu-
lation—those who cannot afford to equip them-
selves for the chase—hire themselves out as coolies.

This occupation is shared by the women, who
bear fatigue very well and who enjoy much better
health than their husbands, whose laziness reaches
to such a point that in preference to bestirring
themselves, they are capable of passing a whole
night in the open, heedless of heat or cold and
stretched on a bed of stones.

Polyandry (to which I shall return with fur-
ther details) is a factor in keeping the population
united. It creates large families who cultivate the
land for the common good, aided by yaks, zos, and
zomos (oxen and cows). A member of a family


THE UNKNOWN LIFE OF JESUS CHRIST 12 3

cannot sever himself from it, and if he dies his
share reverts to the community.

Little else save wheat is sown, the grains of
which, owing to the severity of the climate, are
small. Barley is also cultivated and pulverized
before sale.

Once the field tasks are terminated, all the
men go to gather on the mountains the wild herb
enoriota, as well as the great thorn ddma. From
these they make fuel, which is scarce in Ladak,
where neither woods nor gardens are ever seen and
it is only occasionally one finds on a riverbank a
thin clump of willows or poplars. Near the villages,
aspen trees are also to be found; but for want of
fertile ground, gardening is rendered difficult.

The absence of wood is, above all, apparent
in the dwellings, which are sometimes built with
bricks dried in the sun but more frequently with
medium-sized stones, massed together with a kind
of mortar composed of clay and chopped straw.
These buildings are two-storied, carefully white-
washed in front, and have window sashes painted
in showy colors. Their horizontal roofs form ter-
races, usually decorated with wild flowers, and
here during the fine season of the year the inhabi-
tants kill time contemplating nature and turning
their prayer wheels.

Each dwelling contains several rooms and
amongst these there is always one set apart for
visitors, the walls of which are decorated with
superb fur skins. In the other rooms are beds and


163 NOTOVITCH CHAPTER TWO

furniture. Rich people possess, moreover, oratories
filled with idols and consecrated to prayer.

Life here is very regular. As regards food,
there is little choice, Ladakian fare being of the
simplest. Breakfast consists of a slice of rye bread.
At midday the table is furnished with a wooden
bowl filled with flour, into which is poured tepid
water. This concoction is stirred with little chop-
sticks till it assumes the consistency of a thick
paste, when finally it is partaken of in little balls
with milk.

In the evening, bread and tea are served. Meat
is considered a superfluous luxury. Sportsmen
alone introduce a little variety into their diet in the
form of wild goat, eagles, and white pheasants,
with which the country abounds. All day long, and
on the smallest pretext, tchang is drunk, a kind of
pale beer unfermented.

If it happens that a Ladakian, mounted on a
pony (such privileged persons are very rare), starts
on an expedition to seek for work in the neighbor-
hood, he provides himself with a small quantity of
meal. Dinnertime come, he dismounts near a river
or stream, fills a small wooden cup (which he
never parts from) with a little flour, kneads it with
water, and finally consumes it.

The Tchampas, or nomads, who compose the
other half of the population of Ladak, are much
poorer and at the same time more uncivilized than
the sedentary Ladakians. They are, for the greater
part, sportsmen and entirely neglect agricultural


THE UNKNOWN LIFE OF JESUS CHRIST 12 3

pursuits. Although they profess the Buddhist faith,
they never frequent the monasteries save when they
are in want of meal, which they take in exchange
for game.

Ordinarily they camp out on the summits of
the mountains, where the cold is intense. While the
Ladakians proper are scrupulously truthful, fond of
learning, but hopelessly idle, the Tchampas are, on
the contrary, very irascible, extremely lively, and
great liars—professing, moreover, supreme disdain
for the convents.

Among these latter dwell the little people of
the Khamba, who come from the outskirts of Lassa
and who lead the miserable existence ofa troupe of
wandering gypsies on the high roads. Unfitted for
any kind of work, speaking a different language
from that of the country in which they seek their
livelihood, they are objects of universal con-
tumely, only tolerated out of pity for their deplor-
able condition when hunger forces them in bands
to seek food in the villages.

Polyandry, which prevails in all Thibetan
families, greatly excited my curiosity. It is by no
means a consequence of the doctrines of Buddha,
it having existed long before his advent. It has
assumed in India considerable proportions and
constitutes an energetic factor in keeping within
limits a population ever on the increase, which
result is also aided by the abominable custom of
strangling newborn infants of the female sex, the
efforts of the English having remained fruitless in


165 NOTOVITCH CHAPTER TWO

their struggle against the suppression of these pos-
sibly future mothers.

Manu himself established polyandry as a law,
and certain Buddhist preachers, having abjured
Brahmanism, introduced this custom into Ceylon,
Thibet, Mongolia, and the Korea. Long repressed
in China, polyandry, which flourishes in Thibet
and Ceylon, is found also among the Kalmouks
between Todas in southern India and Nairs on the
coast of Malabar. Traces of this bizarre family
custom are also to be met with among the Tas-
manians and in the north of America among the
Iroquois.

If Caesar is to be believed, polyandry has also
flourished in Europe, for we read in his De bello
Gallico (Book V): "Uxores habent deni duodenique
inter se communes, et maxime fratres cum frat-
ribus et parentes cum liberis."*

The result of all this is that it is impossible to
consider polyandry as an exclusively religious us-
age. In Thibet, taking into consideration the small
portion of arable ground falling to the share of each
inhabitant, it is best explained from economic
motives. To maintain the 1,500,000 inhabitants
distributed in Thibet over a surface of 1,200,000
square kilometers, the Buddhists were obliged to
adopt polyandry—each family, moreover, being
bound to dedicate one of its members to the

priesthood.

*("Wives are shared between groups of ten or twelve men, especially between
brothers and between fathers and sons." Julius Caesar, The Conquest of Gaul,
trans. S. A. Handford (New York: Penguin Books, 1951), p. 136, n. I.-ED.]


THE UNKNOWN LIFE OF JESUS CHRIST 12 3

The firstborn son is always consecrated to the
gonpa, which is invariably found on an elevation at
the entrance of each village. As soon as the child
has attained his eighth year, he is entrusted to
passing caravans en route for Lassa, where he lives
for seven years as a novice in one of the gonpas of
the town.

There he learns to read and write, studies the
religious rites, and becomes acquainted with the
sacred rolls written in Pali, formerly the language
of the country of Magadha, the reputed birthplace
of the Buddha Gautama.

The eldest brother of a family chooses a wife,
who becomes common to all the members of his
household. The choice of the fianc£ and the nuptial
ceremony are of the most rudimentary character.

As soon as a wife and her husbands have
decided upon the marriage of one of their sons, the
eldest among them is dispatched to call on a
neighbor who has a marriageable daughter. The
first and second visits are passed in more or less
banal conversation, accompanied by frequent liba-
tions of tchang; and it is only on the third call that
the young man declares his intention of taking a
wife. The daughter of the family is then produced,
who is generally not unknown to her suitor,
women never veiling their faces in Ladak.

A girl may not be married without her own
consent. If she is willing, she leaves with her
fianc£, becoming his wife and the wife of his
brothers. An only son is generally sent to a woman


asese) OY) WoIy UIdg ‘(QIYL NIT) AePeT Jo pendeD ‘yoy



THE UNKNOWN LIFE OF JESUS CHRIST 12 3

having but two or three husbands, he offering to
become her fourth spouse. Such an offer is rarely
declined, and the young man is at once installed in
his new family.

The parents of a newly married couple usually
live with them till the birth of the first child. The
day after the arrival of this new member of the
family, the grandparents relinquish the whole of
their fortune to the young couple and go to live in
a small dwelling away from them.

Marriage is occasionally contracted between
mere children, who live apart until they have
reached a marriageable age. A woman has the right
to an unlimited number of husbands and lovers. In
this latter instance, if she meets with a young man
who pleases her, she takes him home, gives conge
to all her husbands, and lives with the one she
prefers, announcing that she has taken a jing-tuh
("lover"), which piece of news is received by her
husbands with perfect sangfroid.

Only the vaguest ideas are entertained here
of jealousy. The Thibetan is too cool-blooded to
know love. Such a sentiment would mean to him
an anachronism, if even he did not see in it a
flagrant violation of established usage. In one
word, love would pass in his eyes as both selfish
and unjustifiable.

In the absence of one of the husbands, his
place is offered to a bachelor or widower. These
latter are in a great minority in Ladak, wives


THE LOST YEARS OF JESUS 2 3

Of course, no such file exists. No Bogart-like
detective is prowling a major metropolitan city
searching for clues. And if there were, it is question-
able how successful he could be. As our informa-
tive but imaginary file suggests, we simply do not
know a great deal about Jesus, even though his life
has been the focus of the most detailed, painstak-
ing, exhaustive historical inquiry ever attempted.

The search for the historical Jesus began at the
end of the eighteenth century when scholars and
theologians began to examine critically the princi-
pal sources for Jesus’ life—the Gospels. The intel-
lectual ferment of the Enlightenment, combined
with the development of historiography and the
historical sense (that is, the recognition that it was
both possible and desirable to find out what
actually happened at a particular point in time),
spurred "the quest of the historical Jesus"—a quest
which has dominated the critical theology of the
nineteenth and most of the twentieth centuries.!*

Scholars discussed whether Jesus was a man or
a myth or some of each; whether he came to
establish a new religion or if he was an eschato-
logical figure—a herald announcing the end of the
world. They debated whether there was a rational
explanation for the miracles, whether Jesus was
necessary to the development of Christianity,
whether the synoptic Gospels were historically
more relevant than the Gospel of John, and even if
there was anything to be gained by further study.
The scholarship was so intense and the writings so


Portrait of the Governor of Ladak

Inscription on the back of photograph:—From Pandit
Surajbal Manphal (Oxon.) to Nicolas Notovitch at Leh,
November 1887. In token of an interesting acquaintance
on the northern confines of India.


THE UNKNOWN LIFE OF JESUS CHRIST 12 3

generally surviving their feeble husbands. Some-
times a Buddhist traveller is chosen, whose affairs
detain him in the village. In the same way, a
husband who travels or seeks work in the neighbor-
ing country profits at each halt by like hospitality
from his coreligionists, whose generosity, however,
is not always unactuated by ulterior motives.

In spite of the peculiarity of their position,
women are held in great esteem and enjoy perfect
freedom in the choice of their husbands or jing-
tuhs. They are always good-humored, interested in
all that takes place, and are free to go wherever
they choose—save in the principal prayer cham-
bers of the monasteries, to which access is strictly
forbidden them.

Children only regard their mothers. They feel
no affection for their fathers, for the excellent
reason that they apparently have so many.

Without for one moment approving of polyan-
dry, I cannot condemn it in Thibet; for without it,
the population would increase prodigiously and
famine and misery overwhelm the nation, bringing
in their rear the sinister cortege of theft, murder,
and other crimes hitherto absolutely unknown
throughout the country.

A FESTIVAL IN A GONPA

Leh, capital of Ladak, is a little town boasting
not more than five thousand inhabitants and com-
prised in two or three streets of houses painted


Portrait of the Governor of Ladak

Inscription on the back of photograph:—From Pandit
Surajbal Manphal (Oxon.) to Nicolas Notovitch at Leh,
November 1887. In token of an interesting acquaintance
on the northern confines of India.


THE UNKNOWN LIFE OF JESUS CHRIST 12 3

white. In the center of it stands the square "place" of
the bazaar, where merchants from India, China,
Turkestan, Kashmir, and various parts of Thibet
come to exchange their goods for the Thibetan gold
brought to them by the natives, seeking not only
supplies of cloth gowns for their monks, but even
the smallest objects of utility.

An old and uninhabited palace rises on a hill
overlooking the town, in the middle of which is
found the vast two-storied residence of my friend
the Vizir Surajbal, governor of Ladak, a most
sympathetic Punjabian who has taken his degree of
philosophy in London.

To enliven my stay in Leh, he organized in
the square of the bazaar a grand polo* match,
while in the evening dances and games were given
before the terrace of his house.

Many bonfires threw a brilliant light on the
crowds of people who thronged to the entertain-
ment. They formed a large circle, in the midst of
which a group of performers, disguised as devils,
beasts, and sorcerers, disported themselves, flutter-
ing, jumping, and revolving in a rhythmical dance
to the monotonous music of two long trumpets,
accompanied by a drum.

The infernal racket and the continual shout-
ings of the crowd fatigued me extremely. The
entertainment concluded with the graceful dances
of the Thibetan women, who, pirouetting and

*Polo, a favorite game of the Mogul emperors, was introduced into India 900
years ago by its Mussulman conquerors.


seule] uejaqyy



THE UNKNOWN LIFE OF JESUS CHRIST 12 3

swaying from side to side, made us, on reaching
our windows, a profound obeisance, saluting us in
crossing their wrists by the jangling of their copper
and ivory bangles.

Early next day I started for the great convent
Himis which, in a picturesque situation, stands
on the summit of a rock dominating the valley of
the Indus. It is one of the chief monasteries of the
country and is supported by the contributions of
the inhabitants and subsidies sent from Lassa.

On the road which leads to it, after having
crossed the Indus by a bridge near which nestle
numerous villages, one finds endless jetties covered
with engraved stones and t'horthenes, which our
guides took especial care to pass on the right-hand
side. I wanted to turn my horse to the left, but the
Ladakians at once made me retrace my steps,
leading my horse by the bridle to the right and
explaining to me that such was the custom of the
country. I tried to find out the origin of this
superstition but in vain.

We continued our way towards the gonpa,
which is surmounted by a tower with indented
parapets visible from afar, and found ourselves
before a large door painted in vivid colors, the
entrance to a vast two-storied edifice which en-
closes a courtyard paved with small stones.

To the right, in one of its angles, is another
large painted door, ornamented with bands of cop-
per. This is the entrance to the principal temple,
whose interior is decorated with paintings of the


Musicians of the Monastery

Trumpets in Thibet are sometimes above six feel long.


THE UNKNOWN LIFE OF JESUS CHRIST 12 3

chief idols and where a huge image of Buddha is to
be seen flanked by a multitude of minor deities.

To the left is a verandah furnished with an
immense prayer wheel, and here on our arrival all
the lamas of the convent with their chief were
grouped together. Below the verandah were several
musicians, who held drums and long trumpets. On
the right of the courtyard, a succession of doors led
to the rooms of the monks, all furnished with
sacred pictures and ornamented with little prayer
wheels, surmounted by tridents decked with rib-
bons and painted red and black.

In the middle of the courtyard rose two large
masts, from the tops of which floated yaks' (ox)
tails and long, paper streamers inscribed with reli-
gious precepts. Along the whole length of the
convent walls there were prayer girouettes adorned
with ribbons.

A profound silence reigned, everyone anx-
iously awaiting the commencement of some reli-
gious mystery. We took our places on the verandah
not far from the lamas. Almost immediately the
musicians drew from their long trumpets soft
monotonous sounds, accompanying themselves on
a curious kind of circular drum attached to a stave
fixed in the ground.

At the first notes of the melancholy chant
which followed upon this bizarre music, the doors
of the convent opened wide, giving access to some
twenty persons disguised as animals, birds, devils,
and monsters of every kind. On their breasts they


177 NOTOVITCH CHAPTER TWO

bore fantastic devices of demons and death's heads
embroidered in Chinese silk of various colors,
while from their headdresses, which took the form
of conical hats, hung suspended long multicolored
ribbons covered with inscriptions. Over their faces
they wore masks, on which death's heads were
worked in white silk.

Thus apparelled they slowly made the circuit of
the masts, extending their arms from time to time
and throwing into the air with their left hands a sort
of spoon, a part of which consisted ofa fragment of
the human skull ornamented with hair, taken, I was
assured, from the scalps of enemies.

Their promenade round the masts soon devel-
oped into a kind of restless leaping. At a prolonged
roll from the drum they came to a sudden stand-
still, only to start off again, brandishing towards
the sky in a threatening manner little, yellow
beribboned sticks.

Finally, having saluted the chief lama, they
approached the entrance of the temple, whence
proceeded at the same moment other masqueraders,
their heads covered with copper masks. The cos-
tumes they wore were composed of broidered ma-
terials of various colors. With one hand they held a
tambourine, while with the other they tinkled little
bells. From each tambourine hung a ball, which, at
the least movement of the hand, rebounded against
the sonorous skin of the instrument.

These fresh performers made the tour of the
courtyard several times, marking time with their


Masqueraders with Conical Hats


J 8 ELIZABETH CLARE PROPHET CHAPTER ONE

profuse that entire libraries on the subject of the
historical Jesus could be assembled."

Scholars are now virtually in agreement that
Jesus did in fact exist, but because of a scarcity of
historical information no biography of his life, in
the modern sense of the word, can be drawn.

The earliest writings about Jesus fall into two
categories: Christian and non-Christian. The non-
Christian records, written by Josephus, Pliny the
Younger, Tacitus, and Suetonius about sixty to
ninety years after the crucifixion, are so brief
that they do little more than help establish his
historicity."

The Gospels, probably written between A.D.
60 and 100, are the principal source of information
about Jesus. Although of immense historical value,
scholars contend they were never intended to be
biographies—a judgment that must be recon-
sidered in light of the fact that we do not neces-
sarily have the writings of the Evangelists and the
apostles in their original, unedited form.

With the exception of a few papyrus fragments
from the second century, the earliest known manu-
scripts of the Gospels are from the fourth century.
Furthermore, the texts of the Gospels were in a
fluid state—that is, subject to change by copyists for
theological or other reasons—until they were stan-
dardized in about the middle of the fourth century.
As a result, we have no way of telling whether we
have received the Gospels intact or to what degree
they have been edited, interpolated, subjected to


179 NOTOVITCH CHAPTER TWO

In answer to this signal, young men dressed as
warriors came out from the temple. They wore
monstrous green masks adorned with small trian-
gular flags, short shirts, and anklets of beribboned
bells. Making an infernal din with their tambou-
rines and bells, they gyrated round the gods seated
on the ground.

Two big fellows who accompanied them,
dressed in tights, acted the part of buffoons, execut-
ing all sorts of grotesque movements and comical
feats. One of them, dancing all the time, kept
striking his companion's drum. This evoked the
delight of the crowd, who rewarded his contortions
with peals of laughter.

A fresh group of players now joined the throng,
personating the greatest powers after Divinity.
Their disguise consisted of red miters and yellow
pantaloons. They held the usual bells and tambou-
rines and took up their position opposite the gods.

Almost the last performers to enter upon the
scene wore red and brown masks and had three
eyes painted on their breasts. These, with the
preceding players, fell into two ranks, executing to
the accompaniment of tambourines and general
music a wild dance—advancing, receding, revolv-
ing in circles, and forming columns, filling in the
pauses with low obeisances.

After a time, this scene of excitement, which
wearied us terribly, began to calm down a little.
Gods, demigods, kings, men, and spirits rose and,
followed by all the other masqueraders, directed


Thlogan-Poudma-Jungnas


Masqueraders in the Suite of the Gods


THE UNKNOWN LIFE OF JESUS CHRIST 12 3

their steps towards the entrance of the temple,
whence proceeded with utmost gravity a number
of men admirably disguised as skeletons. All these
sorties had been previously arranged and each had
its particular signification.

The cortege of dancers gave place to these
funereal-looking beings, who directed their steps
gravely towards the masts. There they came to a
standstill, manipulating pieces of wood hanging
from their sides in such a manner as to imitate to
perfection the rattling of jawbones.

They made the round of the courtyard thrice,
marching to the rhythm of the intermittent beating
of the drums and finally intoning a religious chant.
Having once more worked their artificial jaws, they
ground their teeth and, making a few more painful
contortions, came to a standstill.

At this juncture, an effigy of the enemy of
man, made in a kind of plaster of Paris and placed at
the foot of one of the masts, was seized and broken
to bits, the oldest men among the spectators distrib-
uting the pieces to the skeletons as a sign of their
resignation to join them anon in the cemeteries.

The performance being now at an end, the
chief lama came up to me and begged me to
accompany him to the principal terrace to drink
tchang which was flowing in honor of the festival.
I accepted his invitation with pleasure, for my head
was in a whirl through the prolonged spectacle
I had just witnessed.


183 NOTOVITCH CHAPTER TWO

After having crossed the courtyard and as-
cended a staircase lined with prayer wheels, we
passed through two rooms encumbered with idols
and came out upon the terrace, when I seated
myself on a bench opposite the venerable lama,
whose eyes flashed with intelligence. Jugs of
tchang were then brought to us by three monks
who filled small copper cups which they handed
first of all to their chief and then to myself and my
attendants.

"Has our little fete pleased you?" the lama
asked me.

"I found it very interesting,” I replied. "In
fact, I am still under the influence of the spectacle.
But, to confess the truth, I never had the slightest
suspicion that Buddhism in its religious ceremo-
nies could be paraded in such extravagant form."

"No religion," replied the lama, "has more
theatrical ceremonies than ours. But this ritualistic
side of it in no way violates the fundamental princi-
ples of Buddhism. We regard it as a practical means
of maintaining the ignorant crowd in love for and
obedience to the unique Creator, even as with a toy
a parent wins the affection and submission of his
child. In the people, that is to say the uneducated
masses, we see the children of the Father."

"But what signification,” I continued, "have
all these masks, costumes, bells, and dances—in
one word, the entire performance, which appears to
be carried out after a fixed program?"


Masqueraders with Golden Crowns


The God of Animals


THE UNKNOWN LIFE OF JESUS CHRIST 12 3

"We have several similar festivals during the
year," answered the lama. "Mysteries are repre-
sented and actors are invited to take part in them.
They have a perfect latitude as regards their move-
ments and gestures and must conform only to the
details and limits of a central idea.

"Our mysteries are nothing more than panto-
mimes, tending to show forth the gods enjoying
that high degree of veneration which brings as a
reward to man serenity of soul and belief in im-
mortal life.

"The actors receive their costumes from the
convents and play after general indications, which
allow full liberty of action. The effect they produce
is certainly imposing, but our own people can alone
appreciate the meaning of their performance. You
also have recourse, we understand, to similar pro-
ceedings, which, however, do not in any way alter
your principle of monotheism."

"Forgive me," I returned, "but surely the mass
of idols which encumber your gonpas is a flagrant
violation of this principle?"

"As I have already told you," replied the lama,
"man is and ever will be in his infancy. He under-
stands all, sees and feels the grandeur of nature,
but is yet incapable of comprehending the Great
Soul creating and animating all things.

"Man has always sought after the tangible; he
has never succeeded in long believing that which
has escaped his material senses. He has ever done


187 NOTOVITCH CHAPTER TWO

his utmost to find a direct means of communica-
tion between himself and the Creator, who has
worked so much good and at the same time, as he
erroneously believes, so much evil upon him.

"For this reason, he has adored every feature
of nature having a beneficial influence. We have a
striking example of this in the ancient Egyptians,
who worshipped animals, trees, and stones, the
winds and the rains.

"Other nations equally steeped in ignorance,
perceiving that the rains did not always bring forth
good harvests and that animals could be disobedi-
ent to their masters, sought for direct intermedi-
aries between themselves and the great mysteries
and unfathomable might of the Creator. Therefore
they made idols, which they regarded as neutral to
their surroundings and to whose mediation they
had constant recourse.

"From the furthest ages to the present day,
I repeat, man has ever leant towards the tangible.
The Assyrians, in seeking the way which should
lead them to the feet of the Creator, turned their
eyes towards the stars, which, although beyond the
limits of attainment, they contemplated with ado-
ration. The Gufbres have preserved this same
belief to the present day.

"Man's nullity and the blindness of his intelli-
gence render him incapable of conceiving the
invisible and spiritual tie uniting him to the great
Divinity. In this we have the explanation of his
attenuation of the divine principle and the reason


; =
! U 13 t i
4 fi, { ify
Aer
zi | : i kj

Youths Dressed as Warriors


THE LOST YEARS OF JESUS 2 3

scribal errors, or otherwise altered to meet the
needs of orthodoxy as the Church struggled to curb
so-called heresies, such as Gnosticism.!

The discoveries of a Gnostic library at Nag
Hammadi, Egypt, by Muhammad 'All al-Sam-
man, an Arab peasant, in 1945 and a fragment ofa
"Secret Gospel" of Mark in the Judean desert at Mar
Saba by Morton Smith in 1958 strongly suggest that
early Christians possessed a larger, markedly more
diverse body of writings and traditions on the life
and teachings of Jesus than appears in what has been
handed down to us as the New Testament.'®

While contemporary profiles of the famous
abound in purely personal detail—we can learn
how many cigars Winston Churchill smoked daily
and what Mahatma Gandhi ate at any number of
meals—the Gospels do not say what Jesus looked
like, provide only the vaguest of geographic and
chronological data, and even leave a question about
his exact occupation.'”

Scholars believe that Jesus was a carpenter.
Joseph was a carpenter, and at that time it was
customary for a boy to carry on his father's occu-
pation. The language of carpenters, fishermen,
and other common people is embedded in Jesus’
words as recorded in the Gospels.'* But there is no
definitive proof that Jesus was a carpenter. In fact,
Origen objected to the entire notion on the
grounds that "Jesus himself is not described as a
carpenter anywhere in the Gospels accepted by the
churches.""


THE UNKNOWN LIFE OF JESUS CHRIST 201

for his ever seeking after the dominion of things
palpable.

"We have a further illustration of this in
Brahmanism, whose followers, abandoning them-
selves to the love of exterior forms have, not all at
once but by degrees, created a whole army of gods
and demigods. At the same time, man has never
dared to attribute a divine and eternal existence to
the visible images wrought by his hands.

"Perhaps the people of Israel have demon-
strated in a more flagrant manner than any other,
man's love for all that is concrete. For in spite of
the series of wonderful miracles worked by their
Great Creator—who is the same for all peoples—
they could not resist founding a god in metal at the
very time when their prophet Moses was in com-
munion with the Most High on their behalf.

"Buddhism has passed through similar modifi-
cations. Our great reformer, Sakyamuni, inspired
by the Supreme Judge, had a true comprehension of
the majesty and indivisibility of the Master. For this
reason he openly separated himself from the Brah-
mans and their doctrine of polytheism, preaching
the purity and immortality of the Creator and doing
his utmost to put down the images made, it was
supposed, in His likeness.

"The success which he and his disciples met
with among the people provoked considerable per-
secution against him by the Brahmans, who, con-
trary to the laws of the Supreme Being, treated the
people with the greatest despotism, creating new


202 NOTOVITCH CHAPTER TWO

gods merely to increase the source of their personal
revenue.

"Our first holy prophets, to whom we give the
title of Buddhas—that is to say, of wise men and
saints, we believing them to be incarnations of the
one Great Creator—established themselves of old
in various countries of the globe. As their preach-
ings aimed before all at the tyranny of the Brah-
mans and the sinfulness of their making their
religion a mere matter of commerce, they found
the greater number of their followers among the
lower classes of China and India.

"Among these holy prophets, particular vene-
ration is bestowed on the Buddha Sakyamuni,*
who lived three thousand years ago and who by his
teachings brought the whole of China into the way
of the one true and indivisible God, and also on
the Buddha Gautama, who lived two thousand five
hundred years ago and who converted nearly half
the Hindus to the same belief/

"Buddhism is divided into several sects, dif-
fering from each other only in certain religious
ceremonies, the foundation of their doctrine being
everywhere the same. We Thibetan Buddhists are
called Lamaists,* having separated ourselves from
the Foistes about fifteen hundred years ago. Till
then we formed part of the worshippers of Fo-
Sakyamuni, who was the first to collect all the laws

*known in China under the name of Ffl

[In traditional Buddhism, the name "Sakyamuni" (Sage of the Sakya clan)
refers to Gautama Buddha (c. 563-483 B.C.).—ED.]

tfrom the word lama ("superior")


THE UNKNOWN LIFE OF JESUS CHRIST 2 01

made by the various Buddhas at the time of the
great schism in the Brahmanical religion.

"In later years, a Mongolian khoutoukhte
translated into Chinese the books of the great
Buddha, receiving as recompense from the emperor
of China the title of 'Go-Chi'—preceptor to the
king—a title which, after his death, was bestowed
upon the Dalai Lama of Thibet and which has ever
since been borne by those filling that office.

"Our religion admits of two orders of monks,
the red and the yellow. The former—who recognize
the authority of the Panchen, who resides at Tashi
Lumpo and who is the chief of the civil administra-
tion of Thibet—may marry. But we yellow monks
have pronounced vows of celibacy, and our direct
governor is the Dalai Lama. Beyond this point of
difference, the ritual of our two orders is identical.”

"Do both have mystery plays similar to the
one I witnessed today?"

"Yes, with a very few variations. Formerly
these festivals were carried out with most solemn
pomp, but since the conquest of Ladak our con-
vents have been more than once sacked and our
riches taken from us. Now we have to content
ourselves with white vestments and bronze uten-
sils, while in Thibet proper, one only sees golden
vessels and tissues of gold."

"During a recent visit that I made to a gonpa,
one of the lamas told me about a certain prophet, or,
as you would say, a Buddha, of the name of Issa.
Can you tell me anything relative to his existence?"


204 NOTOVITCH CHAPTER TWO

I asked, anxious to seize a favorable opportunity of
broaching the subject I had so near at heart.

"The name of Issa is held in great respect by
the Buddhists," replied my host. "But little is
known about him save by the chief lamas, who
have read the scrolls relative to his life. There have
been an infinite number of Buddhas like Issa, and
there are 84,000 scrolls extant replete with details
of the lives of each; but few have read more than
the hundredth part of them.

"Acting according to established custom, each
student or lama visiting Lassa must make a gift of
one or more copies to the convent to which he
belongs. Our gonpa, among others, already pos-
sesses a large number. Among them are to be
found descriptions of the life and acts of the Bud-
dha Issa, who preached the holy doctrine in India
and among the children of Israel and who was put
to death by the pagans, whose descendants have
since embraced the tenets he then propagated,
which we believe to be yours.

"The great Buddha, Soul of the Universe, is
the incarnation of Brahma. He remains almost
always in passivity, preserving within himself all
things from the beginning of time, and his breath
vivifies the world. Having abandoned man to his
own resources, he yet at certain epochs comes forth
from his inertia, taking upon himself a human
form to save his creatures from irremediable ruin.

"During his earthly existence, Buddha creates
a new world among his scattered people. And after


THE UNKNOWN LIFE OF JESUS CHRIST 2 01

having fulfilled his task, he leaves the earth to
reassume his invisible condition and his life of
perfect bliss.

"Three thousand years ago, the great Buddha
became incarnate in the celebrated prince Sakya-
muni, thus continuing the scheme of his twenty
incarnations. Two thousand five hundred years
ago, the great Soul of the world again incarnated in
Gautama, laying the foundations of a new king-
dom in Burma, Siam, and different islands.

"Soon after, Buddhism began to spread in
China—thanks to the energy of the wise men, who
did their best to propagate the holy doctrine. And
under Ming Ti of the dynasty Han, eighteen hun-
dred and twenty-three years ago,” the precepts of
Sakyamuni received the universal adoption of the
people. Simultaneously with the advent of Bud-
dhism in China, its tenets were diffused amongst
the Israelites.

"Nearly two thousand years ago the perfect
Being, again breaking through his state of inac-
tion, became incarnate in the newborn infant of a
poor family. It was his will that a child in simple
words should enlighten the ignorant as to the life
eternal—by his own example, bringing men back
to the ways of truth in setting before them the
paths most surely leading to the attainment of
moral purity.

"When the holy child was still a boy, he was
taken to India, where until manhood he studied

«It will be remembered that Mr. Notovitch visited the convent in 1887.


206 NOTOVITCH CHAPTER TWO

the laws of the great Buddha who dwells eternally
in heaven."

At this juncture my interlocutor began to
show evident fatigue, commencing to twirl his
prayer girouette as a sign of his desire to end the
conversation. I therefore hastily hazarded the fol-
lowing questions:

"In what language are written the chief rolls
relative to the life of Issa?"

"The documents brought from India to Nepal
and from Nepal to Thibet concerning his existence
are written in the Pali language and are now in
Lassa. But a copy in our language—that is, the
Thibetan—exists in this convent."

"How do they regard Issa in Thibet? Has he
the reputation of a saint?"

"The people are ignorant of his very exis-
tence. Only the chief lamas, who have made a
study of the documents bearing on his life, know
anything about him. But as his doctrine does not
constitute a canonical part of Buddhism—his wor-
shippers not recognizing the authority of the Dalai
Lama—the prophet Issa is not accepted in Thibet
as a principal saint."

"Would you be committing a sin to recite
these copies to a stranger?" I asked.

"That which belongs to God," replied the
lama, "belongs also to man. Our duty obliges us to
help with all good grace in propagating his sacred
word. I am doubtful where the papers are to be


THE UNKNOWN LIFE OF JESUS CHRIST 2 01

found; but if ever you visit our gonpa again, I shall
be pleased to show them to you.”

At this moment two monks entered, uttered
some words unintelligible to my interpreter, and at
once retired.

"I am called to the sacrifices," said the lama.
"Pray excuse me." Whereupon he bowed and,
directing his steps towards the door, disappeared.
Having nothing better to do, I retired to the room
allotted to me, where I passed the night after
partaking of a light supper.

The next day I returned to Leh, thinking
under what pretext I could revisit the convent. Two
days later I sent by a messenger to the chief lama a
present comprising an alarm, a watch, and a ther-
mometer, informing him at the same time of my
desire to return if possible to the convent before my
departure from Ladak, in the hope that he would
permit me to see the book which had formed one
of the themes of our conversation.

I had conceived the project of gaining Kash-
mir and of starting thence at a later period for
Himis, but Fate ordained otherwise. For, passing
before the hill on the top of which is perched the
gonpa of Pintak, my horse stumbled and I was
thrown to the ground with such violence that my
right leg was fractured below the knee.

It was, therefore, impossible for me to con-
tinue my journey, and as I had no desire either to
return to Leh or to demand hospitality at the gonpa


208 NOTOVITCH CHAPTER TWO

of Pintak (an unhealthy abode), I ordered my re-
moval to Himis, where I could arrive after half a
day's slow travelling.

My fractured limb was bound up in an extem-
porized splint—an operation which caused me
intense suffering—and I was lifted into my saddle,
one coolie supporting my leg while another led my
horse by the bridle. We crossed the threshold of
Himis at an advanced hour in the evening.

Hearing of my accident, everyone came out to
meet me. I was carried with great care to the best of
their chambers and placed on a bed of soft ma-
terials, near to which stood a prayer wheel. All this
took place under the immediate surveillance of
the superior, who affectionately pressed the hand
which I offered him in gratitude for his kindness.

Next day I myself made a better kind of splint
for my leg, by the aid of little oblong pieces of
wood joined together with strings, and by remain-
ing perfectly motionless the result was so favorable
that soon I was in a fit state to leave the gonpa and
to start for India in search of surgical aid.

While a youth of the convent kept in motion
the prayer wheel near my bed, the venerable supe-
rior entertained me by endless interesting stories,
constantly taking my alarm and watch from their
cases and putting to me questions as to their uses
and the way they should be worked.

At last, acceding to my earnest entreaties, he
ended by bringing me two large bound volumes
with leaves yellowed by time, and from them he


THE UNKNOWN LIFE OF JESUS CHRIST 201

read to me in the Thibetan language the biography
of Issa, which I carefully noted in my carnet de
voyage* as my interpreter translated what he said.
This curious document is written under the form
of isolated verses, which very often lack sequence.

In a few days my condition had so much
improved that I was able to continue my route.
I therefore, after having taken proper precautions
regarding my injured limb, retraced my steps,
making for India by way of Kashmir. This journey,
accomplished by slow stages, lasted twenty days
and caused me very great suffering.

Nevertheless, thanks to a litter obligingly sent
to me by M. Peychaud (I profit by this occasion to
thank him for the gracious hospitality he bestowed
upon me) and to a ukase from the grand vizir of the
maharajah of Kashmir, which intimated to the
authorities an order to furnish me with carriers,
I was enabled to reach Srinagar, which place I left
almost at once, as I was anxious to reach India
before the first falls of snow.

At Murree I met another Frenchman, Count
Andre de Saint Phall, who was making a pleasure
trip across Hindustan. During the whole journey
we made together as far as Bombay, the young
count showed the most touching solicitude for the
suffering I endured, caused by my fractured leg
and the fever which was then consuming me.

I retain a most grateful remembrance of his
kindness, and never shall I forget the friendly care
bestowed upon me on my arrival at Bombay by the

[travel notebook—ED “Jj


Through Bdbu Amar Nath.

Order to Signature of Officer,
VAZIR VAZARAT HUKM CHAND.
PLNDAKHASS. *

You must provide eight palanquin bearers
(i.e, sedan carriers) for Mr. Notovitch Sahib,
bound for Sri Nagar, through Bdbu Amar Nath Ji,
on hire (ie. the Sahib is to pay wages for the
bearers). There is strict injunction about this order

(i.e., there must be no failure in its execution).

Dated 26th Kartik, 1944.

On the back of the order is:

“26th Kartik, 1944.

Translation of the Ukase, or Order, of the Crand Vizir of the
Maharajah of Kashmir


THE LOST
YEARS
OFJESUS

Elizabeth Clare Prophet
Documentary evidence of
Jesus'17-year journey
to the East

SUMMITUNIVERSITY — PRESS®


Jo ELIZABETH CLARE PROPHET CHAPTER ONE

Apocryphal writings say that while Jesus was
growing up in Egypt and Palestine, he performed
many healings and other miracles. In one in-
stance, he commanded a serpent that had bitten a
youth, Simon the Canaanite, to "suck out all the
poison which thou hast infused into that boy." The
serpent obeyed, whereupon Jesus cursed the ser-
pent and it "immediately burst asunder and died."
Jesus then touched Simon and restored his health.
In other passages, Jesus healed the foot of a boy,
carried water in his cloak, made a short wooden
beam longer to help Joseph with his carpentry, and
fashioned twelve sparrows out of clay, bringing
them to life with a clap of his hands.”

These accounts provide somewhat of a record
of the early Christian traditions concerning Jesus’
childhood, whereas only four of the eighty-nine
chapters of the Gospels, two each in Matthew and
Luke, describe Jesus’ life prior to his ministry.
Known as the infancy narratives, they dwell on
Jesus' genealogy, conception and birth, and a num-
ber of familiar events, such as the annunciation, the
coming of the wise men from the East, the manger
visit ofthe shepherds, the circumcision, the presen-
tation in the Temple at Jerusalem, the flight into
Egypt where the family remained until the death of
Herod in 4 B.C., and the return to Nazareth.?!

After these extraordinary events, Jesus' life is
cloaked in obscurity until the start of his mission.
In fact, only two other things are recorded in the
Gospel of Luke—his physical and spiritual growth


THE UNKNOWN LIFE OF JESUS CHRIST 2 01

Marquis de Morfs, the Vicomte de Breteuil,
M. Monod of the Comptoir d'Escompte, M.
Moet, manager of the consulate, and other sympa-
thetic members of the French colony.

At the same time, I take this opportunity of
adding a word of sincere thanks to the numerous
English friends who during my stay in India hon-
ored me with their friendship and _ hospitality—
among others, Colonel and Lady Napier, Mr. and
Mrs. O'Connor, Mr. Hume, Mr. E. Kay Robertson
of the Civil and Military Gazette, and Mr. Rudyard
Kipling.

For a long time I have meditated publishing
the memoirs of Jesus Christ which I found at
Himis. Important matters, however, have absorbed
my time and it is only today—after having spent
many sleepless nights in arranging my notes,
grouping the verses conformably to the sequence of
the recital, and giving to the whole work unity of
character—that I resolve to give light to the curious
document which follows.


The Life of Saint Issa

BEST OF THE SONS OF MEN

CHAPTER I

1 The earth has trembled and the heavens
have wept because of a great crime which has been
committed in the land of Israel.

2 For they have tortured and there put to
death the great and just Issa, in whom dwelt the
soul of the universe,

3 Which was incarnate in a simple mortal in
order to do good to men and to exterminate their
evil thoughts

4 And in order to bring back man degraded
by his sins to a life of peace, love, and happiness
and to recall to him the one and indivisible Cre-
ator, whose mercy is infinite and without bounds.

5 Hear what the merchants from Israel relate
to us on this subject.

CHAPTER II

1 The people of Israel, who dwelt on a fertile
soil giving forth two crops a year and who possessed
large flocks, excited by their sins the anger of God,


THE UNKNOWN LIFE OF JESUS CHRIST 2 01

2 Who inflicted upon them a terrible chas-
tisement in taking from them their land, their
cattle, and their possessions. Israel was reduced to
slavery by the powerful and rich pharaohs who
then reigned in Egypt.

3 These treated the Israelites worse than ani-
mals, burdening them with difficult tasks and load-
ing them with chains. They covered their bodies
with weals and wounds, without giving them food
or permitting them to dwell beneath a roof,

4 To keep them in a state of continual terror
and to deprive them of all human resemblance.

5 And in their great calamity, the people of
Israel remembered their heavenly protector and,
addressing themselves to him, implored his grace
and mercy.

6 An illustrious pharaoh then reigned in
Egypt who had rendered himself famous by his
numerous victories, the riches he had heaped up,
and the vast palaces which his slaves had erected
for him with their own hands.

7 This pharaoh had two sons, of whom the
younger was called Mossa. Learned Israelites
taught him diverse sciences.

8 And they loved Mossa in Egypt for his
goodness and the compassion which he showed to
all those who suffered.

9 Seeing that the Israelites would not, in
spite of the intolerable sufferings they were endur-
ing, abandon their God to worship those made by


214 NOTOVITCH CHAPTER TWO

the hand of man, which were gods of the Egyptian
nation,

10 Mossa believed in their invisible God,
who did not let their failing strength give way.

11 And the Israelitish preceptors excited the
ardor of Mossa and had recourse to him, praying
him to intercede with the pharaoh his father in
favor of their coreligionists.

12 Wherefore the Prince Mossa went to his
father, begging him to ameliorate the fate of these
unfortunates. But the pharaoh became angered
against him and only augmented the torments
endured by his slaves.

13 It happened that a short time after, a great
evil visited Egypt. The pestilence came to deci-
mate there both the young and the old, the weak
and the strong; and the pharaoh believed in the
resentment of his own gods against him.

14 But the Prince Mossa told his father that it
was the God of his slaves who was interceding in favor
of these unfortunates in punishing the Egyptians.

15 The pharaoh then gave to Mossa his son
an order to take all the slaves of the Jewish race, to
conduct them outside the town, and to found at a
great distance from the capital another city where
he should dwell with them.

16 Mossa then made known to the Hebrew
slaves that he had set them free in the name of
their God, the God of Israel, and he went out with
them from the city and from the land of Egypt.


THE UNKNOWN LIFE OF JESUS CHRIST 2 01

17 He led them into the land they had lost
by their many sins, he gave unto them laws, and
enjoined them to pray always to the invisible Cre-
ator whose goodness is infinite.

18 On the death of Prince Mossa, the Israel-
ites rigorously observed his laws, wherefore God
recompensed them for the ills to which he had
exposed them in Egypt.

19 Their kingdom became the most power-
ful of all the earth, their kings made themselves
famous for their treasures, and a long peace
reigned among the people of Israel.

CHAPTER HI

1 The glory of the riches of Israel spread
throughout the earth, and the neighboring nations
bore them envy.

2 For the Most High himself led the victori-
ous arms of the Hebrews, and the pagans dared not
attack them.

3 Unhappily, as man is not always true to
himself, the fidelity of the Israelites to their God
did not last long.

4 They began by forgetting all the favors
which he had heaped upon them, invoked but
seldom his name, and sought the protection of
magicians and sorcerers.

5 The kings and the captains substituted
their own laws for those which Mossa had written


216 NOTOVITCH CHAPTER TWO

down for them. The temple of God and the prac-
tice of worship were abandoned. The people gave
themselves up to pleasure and lost their original
purity.

6 Several centuries had elapsed since their
departure from Egypt when God determined to
exercise once more his chastisements upon them.

7 Strangers began to invade the land of Is-
rael, devastating the country, ruining the villages,
and carrying the inhabitants into captivity.

8 And there came at one time pagans from
the country of Romeles, on the other side of the
sea. They subdued the Hebrews and established
among them military leaders who by delegation
from Caesar ruled over them.

9 They destroyed the temples, they forced
the inhabitants to cease worshipping the invisible
God, and compelled them to sacrifice victims to
the pagan deities.

10 They made warriors of those who had
been nobles, the women were torn away from their
husbands, and the lower classes, reduced to slav-
ery, were sent by thousands beyond the seas.

11 As to the children, they were put to the
sword. Soon in all the land of Israel naught was
heard but groans and lamentations.

12 In this extreme distress, the people re-
membered their great God. They implored his
grace and besought him to forgive them; and our
Father, in his inexhaustible mercy, heard their

prayer.


THE UNKNOWN LIFE OF JESUS CHRIST 2 01

CHAPTER IV

1 At this time came the moment when the
all-merciful Judge elected to become incarnate in a
human being.

2 And the Eternal Spirit, dwelling in a state
of complete inaction and of supreme beatitude,
awoke and detached itself for an indefinite period
from the Eternal Being,

3 So as to show forth in the guise of human-
ity the means of self-identification with Divinity
and of attaining to eternal felicity,

4 And to demonstrate by example how man
may attain moral purity and, by separating his soul
from its mortal coil, the degree of perfection neces-
sary to enter into the kingdom of heaven, which is
unchangeable and where happiness reigns eternal.

5 Soon after, a marvelous child was born in
the land of Israel, God himself speaking by the
mouth of this infant of the frailty of the body and
the grandeur of the soul.

6 The parents of the newborn child were
poor people, belonging by birth to a family of
noted piety, who, forgetting their ancient grandeur
on earth, praised the name of the Creator and
thanked him for the ills with which he saw fit to
prove them.

7 To reward them for not turning aside from
the way of truth, God blessed the firstborn of this
family. He chose him for his elect and sent him to
help those who had fallen into evil and to cure
those who suffered.


218 NOTOVITCH CHAPTER TWO

8 The divine child, to whom was given the
name of Issa, began from his earliest years to speak
of the one and indivisible God, exhorting the souls
of those gone astray to repentance and the purifica-
tion of the sins of which they were culpable.

9 People came from all parts to hear him,
and they marveled at the discourses proceeding
from his childish mouth. All the Israelites were of
one accord in saying that the Eternal Spirit dwelt in
this child.

10 When Issa had attained the age of thir-
teen years, the epoch when an Israelite should take
a wife,

11 The house where his parents earned their
living by carrying on a modest trade began to be a
place of meeting for rich and noble people, desir-
ous of having for a son-in-law the young Issa,
already famous for his edifying discourses in the
name of the Almighty.

12 Then it was that Issa left the parental
house in secret, departed from Jerusalem, and with
the merchants set out towards Sind,

13. With the object of perfecting himself in
the Divine Word and of studying the laws of the
great Buddhas.

CHAPTER V

1 In the course of his fourteenth year, the
young Issa, blessed of God, came on this side of
Sind and established himself among the Aryas in
the land beloved of God.


THE UNKNOWN LIFE OF JESUS CHRIST 2 01

2 Fame spread the reputation of this mar-
velous child throughout the length of northern
Sind, and when he crossed the country of the five
rivers and the Rajputana, the devotees of the god
Jaine prayed him to dwell among them.

3 But he left the erring worshippers of Jaine
and went to Juggernaut in the country of Orissa,
where repose the mortal remains of Vyasa-Krishna
and where the white priests of Brahma made him a
joyous welcome.

4 They taught him to read and understand
the Vedas, to cure by aid of prayer, to teach, to
explain the holy scriptures to the people, and to
drive out evil spirits from the bodies of men,
restoring unto them their sanity.

5 He passed six years at Juggernaut, at Raja-
griha, at Benares, and in the other holy cities.
Everyone loved him, for Issa lived in peace with
the Vaisyas and the Sudras, whom he instructed in
the holy scriptures.

6 But the Brahmans and the Kshatriyas told
him that they were forbidden by the great Para-
Brahma to come near to those whom he had
created from his side and his feet;

7 That the Vaisyas were only authorized to
hear the reading of the Vedas, and this on festival
days only;

8 That the Sudras were forbidden not only to
assist at the reading of the Vedas, but also from
contemplating them, for their condition was to
serve in perpetuity as slaves to the Brahmans, the
Kshatriyas, and even the Vaisyas.


220 NOTOVITCH CHAPTER TWO

9 '"Death only can set them free from their
servitude’ has said Para-Brahma. Leave them then
and come and worship with us the gods, who will
become incensed against thee if thou dost disobey
them."

10 But Issa listened not to their discourses
and betook him to the Sudras, preaching against
the Brahmans and the Kshatriyas.

11 He inveighed against the act of a man
arrogating to himself the power to deprive his
fellow beings of their rights of humanity; "for,
said he, "God the Father makes no difference
between his children; all to him are equally dear."

12 Issa denied the divine origin of the Vedas*
and the Puranas. "For," taught he to his followers,
"a law has already been given to man to guide him
in his actions;

13. "Fear thy God, bend the knee before him
only, and bring to him alone the offerings which
proceed from thy gains."

14 Issa denied the Trimurti and the incarna-
tion of Para-Brahma in Vishnu, Siva, and other
gods, for said he:

15 "The Judge Eternal, the Eternal Spirit,
comprehends the one and indivisible soul of the
universe, which alone creates, contains, and viv-
ifies all.

16 "He alone has willed and created, he alone
has existed_since all eternity, and his existence will

«Inasmuch as Jesus' closest disciple, John, begins his Gospel with a quote from
the Vedas, "In the beginning was the Word...," the authenticity of this passage
may be questioned. See p. 440 for discussion.



THE LOST YEARS OF JESUS 2 3

and his visit at the age of twelve to the Temple in
Jerusalem on the occasion of Passover.

In a short but powerful vignette, Luke records
that on their way back to Nazareth after attend-
ing the Passover feast, Joseph and Mary suddenly
realized that Jesus was missing from their com-
pany, returned to the city and "found him in the
temple, sitting in the midst of the doctors, both
hearing them and asking them questions. And all
that heard him were astonished at his understand-
ing and answers." When reproached by Mary, Jesus
replied, "Wist ye not that I must be about my
Father's business?"

Jesus then departed for Nazareth with his
parents, "subject unto them."2' Once again the veil
descends, obscuring all of Jesus' activities for the
next seventeen or so years, until he is baptized by
John in the Jordan River at about the age of thirty.

The Gospel of Luke has only one transitional
verse: "And Jesus increased in wisdom and stature,
and in favour with God and man." When all is
said and done, as Christian scholar Kenneth S.
Latourette points out, "The authentic records of
his life and teachings are so brief that they could
easily be printed in a single issue of one of our
larger daily papers, and in these a substantial
proportion of the space [would be] devoted to the
last few days of his life."

Why didn't anyone make a more complete
record of Jesus’ life? Scholars have given consider-
able thought to that question. Dr. John C. Trever,


THE UNKNOWN LIFE OF JESUS CHRIST 2 01

have no end. He has no equal either in the heavens
or on earth.

17 "The Great Creator has not shared his
power with any living being, still less with inan-
imate objects, as they have taught to you; for he
alone possesses omnipotence.

18 "He willed it and the world appeared. In
a divine thought, he gathered together the wa-
ters, separating from them the dry portion of the
globe. He is the principle of the mysterious exis-
tence of man, in whom he has breathed a part of
his Being.

19 "And he has subordinated to man the
earth, the waters, the beasts, and all that he has
created and that he himself preserves in immu-
table order, fixing for each thing the length of
its duration.

20 "The anger of God will soon be let loose
against man; for he has forgotten his Creator, he
has filled his temples with abominations, and he
worships a crowd of creatures which God has made
subordinate to him.

21 "For to do honor to stones and metals, he
sacrifices human beings, in whom dwells a part of
the spirit of the Most High.

22 "For he humiliates those who work by the
sweat of their brow to acquire the favor of an idler
seated at his sumptuous board.

23 "Those who deprive their brethren of
divine happiness shall be deprived of it themselves.
The Brahmans and the Kshatriyas shall become


222 NOTOVITCH CHAPTER TWO

the Sudras, and with the Sudras the Eternal shall
dwell everlastingly.

24 "Because in the day of the last judgment
the Sudras and the Vaisyas will be forgiven much
because of their ignorance, while God, on the
contrary, will punish with his wrath those who
have arrogated to themselves his rights."

25 The Vaisyas and the Sudras were filled
with great admiration and asked Issa how they
should pray so as not to lose their eternal felicity.

26 "Worship not the idols, for they hear you
not. Listen not to the Vedas, for their truth is
counterfeit. Never put yourself in the first place
and never humiliate your neighbor.

27 "Help the poor, support the weak, do ill
to no one, and covet not that which thou hast not
and which thou seest belongeth to another."

CHAPTER VI

1 The white priests and the warriors, becom-
ing acquainted with the discourses of Issa addressed
to the Sudras, resolved upon his death and sent with
this intent their servants to seek out the young
prophet.

2 But Issa, warned of his danger by the
Sudras, left the neighborhood of Juggernaut by
night, reached the mountain, and established him-
self in the country of Gautamides, the birthplace
of the great Buddha Sakyamuni, in the midst of a
people worshipping the one and sublime Brahma.

3 After having perfected himself in the Pali


THE UNKNOWN LIFE OF JESUS CHRIST 2 01

language, the just Issa applied himself to the study
of the sacred writings of the Sutras.

4 Six years after, Issa, whom the Buddha had
elected to spread his holy word, had become a
perfect expositor of the sacred writings.

5 Then he left Nepal and the Himalayan
mountains, descended into the valley of Raj-
putana, and went towards the west, preaching to
diverse peoples the supreme perfection of man,

6 Which is—to do good to one's neighbor,
being the sure means of merging oneself rapidly in
the Eternal Spirit: "He who shall have regained his
original purity," said Issa, "will die having ob-
tained remission for his sins, and he will have the
right to contemplate the majesty of God."

7 In crossing pagan territories, the divine
Issa taught that the worship of visible gods was
contrary to the law of nature.

8 "For man," said he, "has not been permit-
ted to see the image of God, and yet he has made a
host of deities in the likeness of the Eternal.

9 "Moreover, it is incompatible with the hu-
man conscience to make less matter of the gran-
deur of divine purity than of animals and objects
executed by the hand of man in stone or metal.

10 "The Eternal Lawgiver is one; there is no
other God but he. He has not shared the world
with anyone, neither has he informed anyone of
his intentions.

11 "Even as a father would act towards his
children, so will God judge men after their deaths


224 NOTOVITCH CHAPTER TWO

according to the laws of his mercy. Never would he
so humiliate his child as to transmigrate his soul,
as in a purgatory, into the body of an animal."

12 "The heavenly law," said the Creator by
the mouth of Issa, "is opposed to the immolation
of human sacrifices to an image or to an animal;
for I have consecrated to man all the animals and
all that the earth contains.

13. "All things have been sacrificed to man,
who is directly and intimately associated with me
his Father; therefore he who shall have stolen from
me my child will be severely judged and chastised
by the divine law.

14 "Man is naught before the Eternal Judge,
as the animal is naught before man.

15 "Wherefore I say unto you, Leave your
idols and perform not rites which separate you from
your Father, associating you with the priests from
whom the heavens have turned away.

16 "For it is they who have led you from the
true God and whose superstitions and cruelties
conduce to the perversion of your soul and the loss
of all moral sense."

CHAPTER VII

1 The words of Issa spread among the pagans
in the midst of the countries he traversed, and the
inhabitants forsook their idols.

2 Seeing which the priests exacted of him
who glorified the name of the true God, reason in
the presence of the people for the reproaches he


THE UNKNOWN LIFE OF JESUS CHRIST 2 01

made against them and a demonstration of the
nothingness of their idols.

3 And Issa made answer to them: "If your
idols and your animals are powerful and really
possessed of supernatural strength, then let them
strike me to the earth."

4 "Work then a miracle," replied the priests,
"and let thy God confound our gods, if they inspire
him with contempt."

5 But Issa then said: "The miracles of our
God have been worked since the first day when the
universe was created; they take place every day and
at every moment. Whosoever seeth them not is
deprived of one of the fairest gifts of life.

6 "And it is not against pieces of stone,
metal, or wood, which are inanimate, that the
anger of God will have full course; but it will fall
on men, who, if they desire their salvation, must
destroy all the idols they have made.

7 “Even as a stone and a grain of sand,
naught as they are in the sight of man, wait
patiently the moment when he shall take and make
use of them,

8 "So man must await the great favor that
God shall accord him in his final judgment.

9 "But woe unto you, ye enemies of men, if
it be not a favor that you await but rather the wrath
of the Divinity—woe unto you if ye expect mira-
cles to bear witness to his power.

10 "For it will not be the idols that he will
annihilate in his anger but those who shall have

'


226 NOTOVITCH CHAPTER TWO

erected them. Their hearts shall be consumed with
eternal fire, and their lacerated bodies shall go to
satiate the hunger of wild beasts.

11 "God will drive the impure from among
his flocks, but he will take back to himself those
who shall have gone astray through not having
recognized the portion of spirituality within them."

12 Seeing the powerlessness of their priests,
the pagans had still greater faith in the sayings of
Issa and, fearing the anger of the Divinity, broke
their idols to pieces. As for the priests, they fled to
escape the vengeance of the populace.

13. And Issa further taught the pagans not to
strive to see the Eternal Spirit with their eyes but to
endeavor to feel him in their hearts and by purity
of soul to render themselves worthy of his favors.

14 "Not only," said he unto them, “abstain
from consuming human sacrifices, but immolate
no creature to whom life has been given, for all
things that exist have been created for the profit
of man.

15 "Do not steal the goods of your neighbor,
for that would be to deprive him of what he has
acquired by the sweat of his brow.

16 "Deceive no one, so as not to be your-
selves deceived. Endeavor to justify yourself before
the last judgment, for then it will be too late.

17 "Do not give yourselves up to debauch-
ery, for that would be to violate the laws of God.

18 "You shall attain to supreme happiness,


THE UNKNOWN LIFE OF JESUS CHRIST 2 01

not only in purifying yourselves, but also in guid-
ing others in the way that shall permit them to gain
original perfection."

CHAPTER VIII

1 The neighboring countries resounded with
the prophecies of Issa, and when he entered into
Persia the priests became alarmed and forbade the
inhabitants to listen to him.

2 And when they saw all the villages wel-
coming him with joy and listening devoutly to his
sermons, they gave orders to arrest him and had
him brought before the high priest, where he
underwent the following interrogation:

3 "Of what new God dost thou speak? Art
thou not aware, unhappy man, that Saint Zoroaster
is the only just one admitted to the privilege of
communion with the Supreme Being,

4 "Who ordered the angels to put down in
writing the word of God for the use of his people,
laws that were given to Zoroaster in paradise?

5 "Who then art thou to dare here to blas-
pheme our God and to sow doubt in the hearts of
believers?"

6 And Issa said unto them: "It is not ofa new
God that I speak but of our Heavenly Father, who
has existed since all time and who will still be after
the end of all things.

7 "It is of him that I have discoursed to the
people, who, like unto innocent children, are not


228 NOTOVITCH CHAPTER Two

yet capable of comprehending God by the simple
strength of their intelligence or of penetrating into
his divine and spiritual sublimity.

8 "But even as a babe discovers in the dark-
ness its mother's breast, so even your people, who
have been led into error by your erroneous doctrine
and your religious ceremonies, have recognized by
instinct their Father in the Father of whom I am
the prophet.

9 "The Eternal Being has said to your people
through the medium of my mouth: 'You shall not
worship the sun, for it is but a part of the world
which I have created for man.

10 '"The sun rises in order to warm you
during your work; it sets to allow you the repose
which I myself have appointed.

11 "'It is to me, and to me alone, that you
owe all that you possess, all that is to be found
about you, above you, and below you."

12 "But," said the priests, "how could a
people live according to the rules of justice if it had
no preceptors?"

13 Then Issa answered, "So long as the
people had no priests, the natural law governed
them, and they preserved the candor of their souls.

14 "Their souls were with God, and to com-
mune with the Father they had recourse to the
medium of no idol or animal, nor to the fire, as is
practiced here.

15 "You contend that one must worship the
sun, the spirit of good and of evil. Well, I say unto


THE UNKNOWN LIFE OF JESUS CHRIST 2 01

you, your doctrine is a false one, the sun acting not
spontaneously but according to the will of the
invisible Creator who gave it birth

16 "And who has willed it to be the star that
should light the day, to warm the labor and the
seedtime of man.

17 "The Eternal Spirit is the soul of all that
is animate. You commit a great sin in dividing it
into a spirit of evil and a spirit of good, for there is
no God outside the good,

18 "Who, like unto the father of a family,
does but good to his children, forgiving all their
faults if they repent them.

19 "The spirit of evil dwells on the earth in
the hearts of those men who turn aside the chil-
dren of God from the strait path.

20 "Wherefore I say unto you, Beware of the
day of judgment, for God will inflict a terrible
chastisement upon all those who shall have led his
children astray from the right path and have filled
them with superstitions and prejudices;

21 "Those who have blinded them that see,
conveyed contagion to the healthy, and taught the
worship of the things that God has subordinated to
man for his good and to aid him in his work.

22 "Your doctrine is therefore the fruit of
your errors; for desiring to bring near to you the God
of truth, you have created for yourselves false gods."

23 After having listened to him, the magi
determined to do him no harm. But at night, when
all the town lay sleeping, they conducted him


230 NOTOVITCH CHAPTER TWO

outside of the walls and abandoned him on the
high road, in the hope that he would soon become
a prey to the wild beasts.

24 But, protected by the Lord our God,
Saint Issa continued his way unmolested.

CHAPTER IX

1 Issa, whom the Creator had elected to
remind a depraved humanity of the true God, had
reached his twenty-ninth year when he returned to
the land of Israel.

2 Since his departure the pagans had in-
flicted still more atrocious sufferings on the Israel-
ites, who were a prey to the deepest despondency.

3 Many among them had already begun to
abandon the laws of their God and those of Mossa
in the hope of appeasing their savage conquerors.

4 In the face of this evil, Issa exhorted his
compatriots not to despair because the day of the
redemption of sins was at hand, and he confirmed
them in the belief which they had in the God of
their fathers.

5 "Children, do not give yourselves up to
despair," said the Heavenly Father by the mouth of
Issa, "for I have heard your voice, and your cries
have reached me.

6 "Dp not weep, O my beloved ones! For
your grief has touched the heart of your Father,
and he has forgiven you, even as he forgave your
forefathers.

7 "Do not abandon your families to plunge


J 12 ELIZABETH CLARE PROPHET CHAPTER ONE

director of the Dead Sea Scrolls Project of the
School of Theology at Claremont, California, be-
lieves the dearth of information is an irony of
history, the natural sociological result of a people
who were not oriented academically or historically,
but religiously.”

Because of our education and culture, we
naturally tend to see things in a historical mode.
We want to know "what happened." But as noted
in the Dictionary of the History of Ideas, “the
earliest Christians seemed to have little place for
mundane history; in a sense they were too other-
worldly, too intent on the spiritual life."?7

Like many other scholars, Dr. Trever theorizes
that early Christians, expecting Jesus’ imminent
return and with it the end of history, probably
thought it was not necessary to write anything
down. New Testament scholar James M. Robinson,
author of A New Quest of the Historical fesus,
believes that the first generation of Jesus' followers
certainly knew what Jesus looked like, as well as a lot
of other personal information, but did not record it
because they were interested in his teaching, not his
personal traits.

Throughout this quest, scholars have focused
on Jesus' ministry and ignored the lost years. This
has not been due to a lack of interest, but a lack of
evidence. "If we had a bit of information [about the
lost years], we'd all pounce upon it," says Professor
Robinson. "But we're sort of helpless." To use a schol-
arly cliche, it is a case of "no texts, no history."


THE UNKNOWN LIFE OF JESUS CHRIST 201

yourselves into debauchery, do not lose the nobility
of your feelings, and do not worship idols who will
remain deaf to your voices.

8 "Fill my temple with your hope and with
your patience and abjure not the religion of your
fathers; for I alone have guided them and have
heaped them with benefits.

9 "You shall lift up those who have fallen,
you shall give food to the hungry, and you shall
come to the aid of the sick, so as to be all pure and
just at the day of the last judgment which I prepare
for you."

10 The Israelites came in crowds at the word
of Issa, asking him where they should praise the
Heavenly Father, seeing that the enemy had razed
their temples to the ground and laid low their
sacred vessels.

11. And Issa made answer to them that God
had not in view temples erected by the hands of
man, but he meant that the human heart was the
true temple of God.

12 "Enter into your temple, into your heart.
Illumine it with good thoughts and the patience
and immovable confidence which you should have
in your Father.

13 "And your sacred vessels, they are your
hands and your eyes. See and do that which is
agreeable to God, for in doing good to your neigh-
bor you accomplish a rite which embellishes the
temple wherein dwells he who gave you life.

14 "For God has created you in his own


232 NOTOVITCH CHAPTER TWO

likeness—innocent, with pure souls and_ hearts
filled with goodness, destined not for the concep-
tion of evil schemes but made to be sanctuaries of
love and justice.

15 "Wherefore I say unto you, sully not your
hearts, for the Supreme Being dwells therein eter-
nally.

16 "If you wish to accomplish works marked
with love or piety, do them with an open heart and
let not your actions be governed by calculations or
the hope of gain.

17 "For such actions would not help to your
salvation, and you would fall into that state of
moral degradation where theft, lying, and murder
pass for generous deeds."

CHAPTER X

1 Saint Issa went from one town to another,
strengthening by the word of God the courage of
the Israelites, who were ready to succumb to the
weight of their despair; and thousands of men
followed him to hear him preach.

2 But the chiefs of the towns became afraid
of him, and they made known to the principal
governor who dwelt at Jerusalem that a man named
Issa had arrived in the country; that he was stirring
up by his discourses the people against the
authorities; that the crowd listened to him with
assiduity, neglected the works of the state, and
affirmed that before long it would be rid of its
intrusive governors.


THE UNKNOWN LIFE OF JESUS CHRIST 2 01

3 Then Pilate, governor of Jerusalem, or-
dered that they should seize the person of the
preacher Issa, that they should bring him into the
town and lead him before the judges. But in order
not to excite the anger of the populace, Pilate
charged the priests and the learned Hebrew elders
to judge him in the temple.

4 Meanwhile Issa, continuing his preach-
ings, arrived at Jerusalem; and, having learnt of his
arrival, all the inhabitants, knowing him already by
reputation, went out to meet him.

5 They greeted him respectfully and opened
to him the gates of their temple in order to hear
from his mouth what he had said in the other cities
of Israel.

6 And Issa said unto them: "The human
race perishes because of its lack of faith, for the
darkness and the tempest have scattered the flocks
of humanity and they have lost their shepherds.

7 "But the tempest will not last forever, and
the darkness will not always obscure the light. The
sky will become once more serene, the heavenly
light will spread itself over the earth, and the flocks
gone astray will gather around their shepherd.

8 "Do not strive to find straight paths in
the darkness, lest ye fall into a pit; but gather
together your remaining strength, support one an-
other, place your confidence in your God, and
wait till light appears.

9 "He who sustains his neighbor, sustains


234 NOTOVITCH CHAPTER TWO

himself; and whosoever protects his family, pro-
tects the people and the state.

10 "For be sure that the day is at hand when
you shall be delivered from the darkness; you shall
be gathered together as one family; and your en-
emy, who ignores what the favor of God is, shall
tremble with fear."

11 The priests and the elders who were listen-
ing to him, filled with admiration at his discourse,
asked him if it were true that he had tried to stir up
the people against the authorities of the country, as
had been reported to the governor Pilate.

12 "Cn one excite to insurrection men gone
astray, from whom the obscurity has hidden their
door and their path?” replied Issa. "I have only
warned the unfortunate, as I do here in this temple,
that they may not further advance along the dark-
ened way, for an abyss is open under their feet.

13 "Earthly power is not of long duration,
and it is subject to many changes. Of what use that
man should revolt against it, seeing that one power
always succeeds to another power? And thus it will
come to pass until the extinction of humanity.

14 "Against which, see you not that the
mighty and the rich sow among the sons of Israel a
spirit of rebellion against the eternal power of
heaven?"

15 The elders then asked: "Who art thou,
and from what country dost thou come? We have
not heard speak of thee before, and we know not
even thy name.”


THE UNKNOWN LIFE OF JESUS CHRIST 2 01

16 "I am an Israelite," replied Issa. "From
the day of my birth I saw the walls of Jerusalem,
and I heard the weeping of my brothers reduced to
slavery and the lamentations of my sisters who were
carried away by the pagans.

17 "And my soul was filled with sadness
when I saw that my brethren had forgotten the true
God. As a child, I left my father's house and went
to dwell among other peoples.

18 "But having heard that my brethren were
suffering still greater tortures, I have come back to
the country where my parents dwell to remind my
brothers of the faith of their forefathers, which
teaches us patience on earth to obtain perfect and
sublime happiness in heaven."

19 And the learned elders put him this ques-
tion: "It is said that thou deniest the laws of Mossa
and that thou teachest the people to forsake the
temple of God?"

20 And Issa replied: "One cannot demolish
that which has been given by our Heavenly Father,
neither that which has been destroyed by sin-
ners; but I have enjoined the purification of the
heart from all blemish, for it is the true temple
of God.

21 "As to the laws of Mossa, I have en-
deavored to establish them in the hearts of men.
And I say unto you that you do not understand
their real meaning, for it is not vengeance but
mercy that they teach; only the sense of these
laws has been perverted."


236 NOTOVITCH CHAPTER TWO

CHAPTER XI

1 Having hearkened unto Issa, the priests
and the wise elders decided among themselves not
to judge him, for he did harm to no one. And
presenting themselves before Pilate, appointed
governor of Jerusalem by the pagan king of the
country of Romeles, they addressed him thus:

2 "We have seen the man whom thou ac-
cusest of inciting our people to rebellion; we have
heard his discourses, and we know him to be our
compatriot.

3 "But the chiefs ofthe cities have made thee
false reports, for this is a just man who teaches the
people the word of God. After having interrogated
him, we dismissed him, that he might go in peace."

4 The governor then became enraged and
sent near to Issa his servants in disguise, so that
they might watch all his actions and report to the
authorities the least word that he should address to
the people.

5 In the meantime, Saint Issa continued to
visit the neighboring towns, preaching the true ways
of the Creator, exhorting the Hebrews to patience,
and promising them a speedy deliverance.

6 And during all this time, many people
followed him wherever he went, several never
leaving him but becoming his servitors.

7 And Issa said: "Do not believe in miracles
wrought by the hand of man, for he who dominates
over nature is alone capable of doing that which is


THE UNKNOWN LIFE OF JESUS CHRIST 2 01

supernatural, whilst man is powerless to stay the
anger of the winds or to spread the rain.

8 "Nevertheless, there is one miracle which
it is possible for man to accomplish. It is when, full
of a sincere belief, he decides to root out from his
heart all evil thoughts, and when to attain his end
he forsakes the paths of iniquity.

9 "And all the things that are done without
God are but errors, seductions, and enchantments,
which only demonstrate to what an extent the soul
of him who practices this art is full of shameless-
ness, falsehood, and impurity.

10 "Put not your faith in oracles; God alone
knows the future: he who has recourse to diviners
profanes the temple which is in his heart and gives
a proof of distrust towards his Creator.

11 "Faith in diviners and in their oracles
destroys the innate simplicity of man and his child-
like purity. An infernal power takes possession of
him, forcing him to commit all sorts of crimes and
to worship idols;

12 "Whereas the Lord our God, who has no
equal, is one, all-mighty, omniscient, and omni-
present. It is he who possesses all wisdom and all
light.

13 "It is to him you must address yourselves
to be consoled in your sorrows, helped in your
works, and cured in your sickness. Whosoever
shall have recourse to him shall not be denied.

14 "The secret of nature is in the hands of


238 NOTOVITCH CHAPTER TWO

God. For the world, before it appeared, existed in
the depth of the divine thought; it became material
and visible by the will of the Most High.

15 "When you address yourselves to him,
become again as children; for you know neither the
past, the present, nor the future, and God is the
Master of all time.”

CHAPTER XII

'

1 "Righteous man," said unto him the spies
of the governor of Jerusalem, "tell us if we shall
perform the will of our Caesar or await our speedy
deliverance."

2 And Issa, having recognized them as peo-
ple appointed to follow him, replied: "I have not
said to you that you shall be delivered from Caesar.
It is the soul plunged in error that shall have its
deliverance.

3 "As there can be no family without a head,
so there can be no order among a people without a
Caesar; to him implicit obedience should be given,
he alone being answerable for his acts before the
supreme tribunal."

4 "Does Caesar possess a divine right?" fur-
ther asked of him the spies. "And is he the best of
mortals?"

5 "There should be no better among men,
but there are also sufferers, whom those elected
and charged with this mission should care for,
making use of the means conferred on them by the
sacred law of our Heavenly Father.


THE UNKNOWN LIFE OF JESUS CHRIST 2 01

6 "Mercy and justice are the highest attri-
butes of a Caesar; his name will be illustrious if he
adhere to them.

7 "But he who acts otherwise, who exceeds
the limit of power that he has over his subordi-
nates, going so far as to put their lives in danger,
offends the great Judge and loses his dignity in the
sight of man."

8 At this juncture, an old woman who had
approached the group, the better to hear Issa, was
pushed aside by one of the spies, who placed
himself before her.

9 Then Issa held forth: "It is not meet that a
son should set aside his mother, taking her place.
Whosoever respecteth not his mother, the most
sacred being after his God, is unworthy of the
name of son.

10 "Listen, then, to what I say unto you:
Respect woman, for she is the mother of the uni-
verse, and all the truth of divine creation lies in her.

11 "She is the basis of all that is good and
beautiful, as she is also the germ of life and death.
On her depends the whole existence of man, for
she is his natural and moral support.

12 "She gives birth to you in the midst of
suffering. By the sweat of her brow she rears you,
and until her death you cause her the gravest
anxieties. Bless her and worship her, for she is your
one friend, your one support on earth.

13. "Respect her, uphold her. In acting thus
you will win her love and her heart. You will find


240 NOTOVITCH CHAPTER TWO

favor in the sight of God and many sins shall be
forgiven you.

14 "In the same way, love your wives and
respect them; for they will be mothers tomorrow,
and each later on the ancestress of a race.

15 "Be lenient towards woman. Her love
ennobles man, softens his hardened heart, tames
the brute in him, and makes of him a lamb.

16 "The wife and the mother are the inap-
preciable treasures given unto you by God. They
are the fairest ornaments of existence, and of them
shall be born all the inhabitants of the world.

17 "Even as the God of armies separated of
old the light from the darkness and the land from
the waters, woman possesses the divine faculty of
separating in a man good intentions from evil
thoughts.

18 "Wherefore I say unto you, after God
your best thoughts should belong to the women
and the wives, woman being for you the temple
wherein you will obtain the most easily perfect
happiness.

19 "Imbue yourselves in this temple with
moral strength. Here you will forget your sor-
rows and your failures, and you will recover the
lost energy necessary to enable you to help your
neighbor.

20 "Do not expose her to humiliation. In
acting thus you would humiliate yourselves and
lose the sentiment of love, without which nothing
exists here below.


THE LOST YEARS OF JESUS 2 3

The traditional position taken by Christian
theologians and scholars is that Jesus was in Naza-
reth or nearby during the lost years and that noth-
ing was written about that period of his life because
he did nothing noteworthy to report.

In 1894, Nicolas Notovitch, a Russian jour-
nalist, published a book, La Vie inconnue de Jésus-
Christ—in English, The Unknown Life of Jesus
Christ—which challenged that point of view.
Notovitch claimed that while traveling in Ladakh
(Little Tibet) late in 1887, he found a copy of an
ancient Buddhist manuscript which explicitly said
where Jesus was during the lost years—India.

Notovitch is something of an enigma. Accord-
ing to The National Union Catalog, he wrote eleven
books. Yet there is almost no biographical informa-
tion available about him. Apparently we know
even less about him than we know about Jesus!
Although we have been able to verify his birth in
the Crimea in 1858,29 we have not been able to
locate a record of his death. He may have been a
war correspondent as well as a journalist—and was
certainly mistaken for a physician while traveling
in the East.'®

Notovitch affirmed his belief in the Russian
Orthodox religion but was probably a convert since a
brief entry in the Encyclopaedia Judaica notes that
his brother Osip Notovitch was born Jewish but
converted _to the Greek Orthodox church as a youth.”

*Osip (1849-1914) was also a journalist. In 1876, he acquired Novosti. a small
daily which he developed into an important political journal. In 1905, the paper
was confiscated after he published a revolutionary appeal for a trade union. Osip
subsequently fled Russia and died abroad."



THE UNKNOWN LIFE OF JESUS CHRIST 2 01

21 "Protect your wife, in order that she may
protect you and all your family. All that you do
for your wife, your mother, for a widow or an-
other woman in distress, you will have done unto
your God."

CHAPTER XIII

1 Saint Issa taught the people of Israel thus
for three years, in every town, in every village, by
the waysides and on the plains; and all that he had
predicted came to pass.

2 During all this time the disguised servants
of Pilate watched him closely without hearing
anything said like unto the reports made against
Issa in former years by the chiefs of the towns.

3 But the governor Pilate, becoming alarmed
at the too great popularity of Saint Issa, who
according to his adversaries sought to stir up the
people to proclaim him king, ordered one of his
spies to accuse him.

4 Then soldiers were commanded to proceed
to his arrest, and they imprisoned him in a subter-
ranean cell where they tortured him in various
ways in the hope of forcing him to make a confes-
sion which should permit of his being put to death.

5 The saint, thinking only of the perfect
beatitude of his brethren, supported all his suffer-
ings in the name of his Creator.

6 The servants of Pilate continued to tor-
ture him and reduced him to a state of extreme


242 NOTOVITCH CHAPTER TWO

weakness; but God was with him and did not allow
him to die.

7 Learning of the sufferings and the tortures
which their saint was enduring, the high priests
and the wise elders went to pray the governor to set
Issa at liberty in honor of an approaching festival.

8 But the governor straightway refused them
this. They then prayed him to allow Issa to appear
before the tribunal of the ancients so that he might
be condemned or acquitted before the festival, and
to this Pilate consented.

9 The next day the governor assembled to-
gether the chief captains, priests, wise elders, and
lawyers so that they might judge Issa.

10 They brought him from his prison and
seated him before the governor between two
thieves to be judged at the same time as he, in
order to show unto the crowd that he was not the
only one to be condemned.

11 And Pilate, addressing himself to Issa,
said unto him: "O man! is it true that thou incitest
the people against the authorities with the intent of
thyself becoming king of Israel?"

12 "One becomes not king at one's own
will," replied Issa, "and they have lied who have
told thee that I stir up the people to rebellion.
I have never spoken of other than the King of
Heaven, and it is he I teach the people to worship.

13 "For the sons of Israel have lost their
original purity; and if they have not recourse to the


THE UNKNOWN LIFE OF JESUS CHRIST 2 01

true God, they will be sacrificed and their temple
shall fall into ruins.

14 "As temporal power maintains order in a
country, I teach them accordingly not to forget it.
I say unto them: 'Live conformably to your station
and your fortune, so as not to disturb the public
order.’ And I have exhorted them also to remember
that disorder reigns in their hearts and in their
minds.

15 "Wherefore the King of Heaven has pun-
ished them and suppressed their national kings.
Nevertheless, I have said unto them, 'If you be-
come resigned to your destinies, as a reward the
kingdom of heaven shall be reserved for you."

16 At this moment, the witnesses were
brought forward, one of whom made the following
deposition: "Thou hast said to the people that the
temporal power is as naught against that of the king
who shall soon deliver the Israelites from the pagan
yoke."

17 "Blessed art thou," said Issa, "for having
spoken the truth. The King of Heaven is greater
and more powerful than the terrestrial law, and his
kingdom surpasses all the kingdoms of the earth.

18 "And the time is not far off when, con-
forming to the divine will, the people of Israel shall
purify them of their sins; for it has been said that a
forerunner will come to proclaim the deliverance
of the people, gathering them into one fold."

19 And the governor, addressing himself to


244 NOTOVITCH CHAPTER TWO

the judges, said: "Dost hear? The Israelite Issa
confesses to the crime of which he is accused.
Judge him, then, according to your laws, and
pronounce against him capital punishment."

20 "We cannot condemn him," replied the
priests and the elders. "Thou hast just heard thyself
that his allusions were made regarding the King of
Heaven and that he has preached naught to the
sons of Israel which could constitute an offense
against the law."

21 The governor Pilate then sent for the
witness who, at his instigation, had betrayed Issa.
The man came and addressed Issa thus: "Didst
thou not pass thyself off as the king of Israel when
thou saidest that he who reigns in the heavens had
sent thee to prepare his people?"

22 And Issa, having blessed him, said: "Thou
shalt be pardoned, for what thou sayest does not
come from thee!" Then, addressing himself to the
governor: "Why humiliate thy dignity, and why
teach thy inferiors to live in falsehood, as with-
out doing so thou hast power to condemn the
innocent?"

23 At these words the governor became ex-
ceeding wroth, ordering the sentence of death to
be passed upon Issa and the acquittal of the two
thieves.

24 The judges, having consulted together,
said unto Pilate: "We will not take upon our heads
the great sin of condemning an innocent man and
acquitting thieves. That would be against the law.


THE UNKNOWN LIFE OF JESUS CHRIST 2 01

25 "Do then as thou wilt." Saying which the
priests and the wise elders went out and washed
their hands in a sacred vessel, saying: "We are
innocent of the death of this just man."

CHAPTER XIV

1 By the order of the governor, the soldiers
then seized Issa and the two thieves, whom they
led to the place of execution, where they nailed
them to crosses erected on the ground.

2 All the day the bodies of Issa and the two
thieves remained suspended, terrible to behold,
under the guard of the soldiers; the people standing
all around, the relations of the sufferers praying
and weeping.

3 At sunset the sufferings of Issa came to an
end. He lost consciousness, and the soul of this
just man left his body to become absorbed in the
Divinity.

4 Thus ended the earthly existence of the
reflection of the Eternal Spirit under the form ofa
man who had saved hardened sinners and endured
many sufferings.

5 Meanwhile, Pilate became afraid of his
action and gave the body of the saint to his parents,
who buried it near the spot of his execution. The
crowd came to pray over his tomb, and the air was
filled with groans and lamentations.

6 Three days after, the governor sent his sol-
diers to carry away the body of Issa to bury it else-
where, fearing otherwise a popular insurrection.


246 NOTOVITCH CHAPTER TWO

7 The next day the crowd found the tomb
open and empty. At once the rumor spread that the
supreme Judge had sent his angels to carry away
the mortal remains of the saint in whom dwelt on
earth a part of the Divine Spirit.

8 When this rumor reached the knowledge
of Pilate, he became angered and forbade anyone,
under the pain of slavery and death, to pronounce
the name of Issa or to pray the Lord for him.

9 But the people continued to weep and to glo-
rify aloud their Master; wherefore many were led into
captivity, subjected to torture, and put to death.

10 And the disciples of Saint Issa abandoned
the land of Israel and scattered themselves among
the heathen, preaching that they should renounce
their errors, bethink them of the salvation of their
souls and of the perfect felicity awaiting humanity
in that immaterial world of light where, in repose
and in all his purity, the Great Creator dwells in
perfect majesty.

11 The pagans, their kings, and their war-
riors listened to the preachers, abandoned their
absurd beliefs, and forsook their priests and their
idols to celebrate the praise of the all-wise Creator
of the universe, the King of kings, whose heart is
filled with infinite mercy.


Chapter Three

On thetrailto Himis

Selections from Swami Abhedananda’s
In Kashmir and Tibet with his
translation of the Himis manuscript


SWAMI ABHEDANANDA


Editor's Note

I. 1922, Swami Abhedananda traveled to the
Himis monastery in order to determine whether
Nicolas Notovitch did in fact obtain a transla-
tion of an ancient Buddhist manuscript describing
Jesus’ sojourn in the East as he claimed in his
Unknown Life of Jesus Christ. He reported that a
lama who gave him a tour of the monastery veri-
fied Notovitch's story, showed him the book that
became the basis for Notovitch's Life of Saint Issa,
and helped him translate a part of the text.

Abhedananda published an account of his jour-
ney, along with a portion of the text he wrote down
while at Himis, in a book written in Bengali entitled
Kashmir O Tibbate—In Kashmir and Tibet.

This work was composed in stages, partly by
Abhedananda and partly by Brahmachari Bhairav
Chaitanya, an assistant who worked from the Swami's
diary and original notes. Abhedananda later up-
dated an early version of the manuscript. Since the
literary style of the text is far less polished than that
of his other writings, and Abhedananda is often
referred to in the third person as "Swamiji,” it


250 ABHEDANANDA CHAPTER THREE

appears that he did not revise the entire text. In
1954, fifteen years after Abhedananda's passing, the
volume was edited once more by Swami Prajna-
nanda and published in a revised second edition.

With the publication of this collection of
eyewitness reports documenting Jesus' travels in the
East, we are pleased to announce that the following
passages from chapters 13 and 15 of In Kashmir and
Tibet have been translated into English for the first
time by three devotees of the ancient wisdom who
desire to see this information reach the Western
student in its purest form: Prasun Kumar De, a
native of Calcutta now living in Los Angeles, Per
Sinclair, an American translator deeply interested
in Indian culture and religions, and Jayasri Majum-
dar, a language instructor and translator from Cal-
cutta now living in Los Angeles. To these friends of
Truth the author and publisher extend their pro-
found appreciation.


J 14 ELIZABETH CLARE PROPHET CHAPTER ONE

Writing mostly in French, Nicolas dealt with
Russian affairs of state and international relations in
many of his works, which include The Pacification
of Europe and Nicholas I, Russia and the English
Alliance: An Historical and Political Study, and
The Czar, His Army and Navy, to name a few.

The Unknown Life of Jesus Christ was his first
and, as far as we know, his only book on a religious
subject. It contains a transcript of the text he
claimed to have discovered but is primarily a
travelogue recap of the find. And this, if we are to
believe his account, came about because ofa series
of coincidences.

In brief, Notovitch's story goes like this. Fol-
lowing the Russo-Turkish War of 1877-78, our
adventurer began a series of travels in the East. He
was interested in the people and the archaeology of
India. Wandering randomly, he reached India by
way of Afghanistan. On October 14, 1887, he left
Lahore for Rawalpindi, worked his way to Kashmir
and then to Ladakh. From there, he planned to
return to Russia by way of Karakorum and Chinese
Turkestan.

Along the way, he visited a Buddhist gompa, or
monastery, at Mulbekh. A gompa, literally "a soli-
tary place," is just that—a place of refuge from the
world of temptation. Some gompas derive their
solitude by being located a reasonable distance from
a village. Others, like the one at Mulbekh, are built
on top of a mountain or on the face ofa cliff."

Mulbekh is the gateway to the world of


Himis Monastery

A dawn, Swamiji went with the lamas to visit
the monastery. He sat down with the head
lama in his office.* The lamas brought in a big
register (visitor's book) and noted our names and
addresses. Swamiji signed in English as follows:
"Swami Abhedananda, Vice President of the Rama-
krishna Mission, Belur Math, near Calcutta."*
Out of curiosity, Swamiji read all the names in the
book but did not find one single Bengali name.
The room was big. There was a spacious mat-
tress [thick gymnasium-type of mat] spread out on
the floor, in the style of the Marwari people. A
number of lama clerks were writing letters or keep-
ing accounts. The main temple and the courtyard
in front of the monastery were under repair. About
thirty Tibetan laborers and masons were at work.
Earth, stone, and wood were being used for the
repair work. Many boys and girls and lama women

were the carriers for the masons. The headmason

*Thirty-four years ago (1888 in the year of Christ) the honorable Swami
Akhandananda, one of the sannyasi (monk) disciples of Sri Ramakrishna,
came from the Barahanagar Temple to visit this monastery.

tAt that time (1921-1924) Swami Abhedananda was the vice-president of
Ramakrishna Math and Mission.


252 ABHEDANANDA CHAPTER THREE

appealed to Swamiji for a contribution for the
laborers, and Swamiji gave them some money.
Having received the donation, the happy workers
began singing mountain songs [folk songs] in their
unintelligible Tibetan language.

I was told that the late Maharaj Pratap Singh
of Kashmir had donated thirty thousand rupees for
the work of restoration. When Pratap Singh of
Punjab attacked this province, the head monk of
the monastery sided with the Maharajah of Kash-
mir and promised six months' rations and lodging
for his entire army., Since then, this monastery has
been bound in eternal friendship with the royal
family of Kashmir.

Prayer wheels had been installed all over the
monastery. In some places, the large prayer wheel
continually rotates by the force of water from a
nearby spring. A bell attached to the wheel rings
constantly. At other places, smaller prayer wheels
in the shape of small drums are arranged in rows.

Some ten to twelve rooms contain images of
gods and goddesses. We have already seen these gods
and goddesses in other temples and described them.
One dark room contains the likeness of a lama
guru, Stag-Sang-Rom-Chen. His divine beauty,
noble figure, and broad forehead indicate distinc-
tion. He is the founder of the monastery. We have
already mentioned that many people call him the
"tiger lama."

Most of these images are made of gold and
silver. There are not many images here which are


ON THE TRAIL TO HIMIS 2 61

made of other metals. The stupas on which they
stand are crafted entirely of silver and inlaid with
precious stones and gold ornamental work. The
ornaments on the bodies of the deities are all of
gold and precious stones. The main ornaments are
bangles on the wrists and arms, necklaces, and
golden crowns.

There is one image ofa goddess, Mandara or
Kumari, which we had not seen in any other place
before. She is the wife of Padma Sambhava (Guru
Rinpoche) and sister of Shanti Rakshita.* In 749
A.D. she left Udyan, a place in northern India,
with her husband and went to preach Buddhism in
Tibet. They used to preach the Mahayana school
of Buddhism. In monasteries such as Sang-Ye,
Ching-Fook, etc., their images are worshiped daily
with devotion. The lamas consider Padma Sam-
bhava an incarnation of Manjusri.

In the Himis monastery, there reside nearly
150 Gye-Loang, or monks, belonging to the Dug-
Pa order. Their caps are red. Each has his separate
room. In a room on the roof lives the Khang-Po, or
the head of the monastery. He speaks a little
English and Hindi. Except for the person who is
looking after us, no lama can speak any language
other than Tibetan. We would have faced a lot of
difficulties if we had not brought an expert inter-
preter with us from Leh.

The monastery here is situated on about two
acres of land. Except on the east, the monastery is

*A well-known anthology of theories written by him has recently been published
by the State of Baroda.



254 ABHEDANANDA CHAPTER THREE

surrounded by high mountains. Some extensions
have been built directly connecting the monastery
with the mountain slopes.

Under this monastery, there are quite a few
temples, both large and small, as well as villages
and farm land. The Kushak, or head monk, of the
monastery has innumerable disciples and devotees
who are householders. Once a year, he visits all his
disciples and receives large donations as tithes.
Besides this, if anybody falls ill or is frightened by
evil spirits, he visits them and is handsomely paid
for his services. All expenses of the monastery are
met from such earnings.

A few years back, Dr. Nicolas Notovitch, a
Russian traveler who was ort a tour of Tibet, fell
down a hill near this hermitage and broke his leg.
The villagers brought him to the guesthouse of the
monastery and the lamas gave him medical aid. He
recovered about a month and a half later. At that
time, he came to know from one of the lamas of the
monastery that Jesus Christ came to India and that
this was described in one of the handwritten manu-
scripts in the library of the monastery. With the
help of one lama, he managed to obtain it and had
it translated into English. After returning home, he
wrote a book entitled The Unknown Life of Jesus. In
his book he discussed this topic in detail.

Swamiji read the book when he was in Amer-
ica and felt very enthusiastic about it. In order to
verify the descriptions, he took the trouble to come
up and see the Himis retreat for himself. Swamiji


ON THE TRAIL TO HIMIS 2 61

inquired of the lamas and learned from them that
the account was indeed true. Swamiji wanted to see
the book in which this subject was written about.

The lama who was showing Swamiji around
took a manuscript off the shelf and showed it to
Swamiji. He said that it was a copy and the original
was in a monastery at Marbour near Lhasa. The
original was written in Pali, but this was a transla-
tion into Tibetan. It consisted of 14 chapters and
224 verses. With his help, Swamiji got a part of it
translated.

Only those verses which describe the activities
of Jesus Christ when he was in India are quoted

here.*

*[In chapter 13 of In Kaihmir and Tibet. Swami Abhedananda described his
experiences at Himis and reproduced only the portion of the Himis manuscript
covering Jesus' trek to India. He placed the other verses from the Himis manu-
script in chapter 15 of his work. We have taken the excerpt from chapter IS and
inserted it into chapter 13 in order to put the verses in their original, and
chronological, order. Abhedananda's version of the Himis manuscript almost
exactly parallels Notovitch's Life of Saint Issa through chapter 5, verse 4.
Following that, Abhedananda excerpted parts of the Himis manuscript cor-
responding to scattered verses of The Life of Saint Issa through chapter 9,

vene 1— DI


Jesus Christ, the Leader of Men

As DESCRIBED IN THE MANUSCRIPT
OF THE HIMIS RETREAT

CHAPTER I

1 The Jews, descendants of Israel, com-
mitted such heinous sins that the earth trembled
and the gods in heaven wept,

2 Because they infinitely tortured and killed
Issa, the great soul in whom the Divine Soul
rested.

3 To render good to all and remove all sinful
thoughts from their minds, the Divine Soul de-
scended on him.

4 And to offer peace, happiness, and love of
God to the sinners and to remind them of the
infinite grace of God, It descended.

5 Thus describe the traders who came to this
country from the land of Israel.

CHAPTER II

1 The tribes of Israel used to live in a very
fertile land which yielded two crops in a year. They
had several herds of sheep and goats. By their sinful
act, they incurred the wrath of God.


ON THE TRAIL TO HIMIS 2 61

2 For this reason, God confiscated all their
property and placed them into the slavery of the
pharaoh, the powerful ruler of Egypt.

3 But the pharaoh inflicted inhuman oppres-
sion upon the descendants of Israel. He put them
in chains, inflicted wounds upon their bodies,
deprived them of their livelihood, and engaged
them in hard labor,

4 So that they would ever remain fearful and
not declare themselves as free men.

5 The sons of Israel, thus exposed to ex-
treme hardship, prayed to the Father of the Uni-
verse, the Saviour of their forefathers, and begged
Him for mercy and help.

6 At that time a rich pharaoh, known for his
conquests, became the ruler of Egypt; his palaces
were handcrafted by the slaves.

7 The pharaoh had two sons. The younger
of the two was called Mosa. He was versed in
science and arts,

8 And he endeared himself to all by virtue of
his good character and his compassion for the
suffering.

9 He saw that the descendants of Israel suf-
fered extreme hardships but had not lost faith in
the Father of the Universe nor started worshiping
the many small gods of the Egyptians.

10 Mosa believed in one God.

11 The teacher-priests of the Israelites brought
this plea to Mosa, that if he asked his father, the


258 ABHEDANANDA CHAPTER THREE

ruler pharaoh, to help their co-workers, it would
lead to the good of all.

12 When Mosa brought this plea to his fa-
ther, his father grew very angry and started op-
pressing his subjects further like slaves.

13 But within a short time, Egypt was vis-
ited by a great plague that began to kill young and
old, rich and poor. The ruler pharaoh thought that
the gods were angry and that he was being thusly
punished.

14 At that time Mosa told his father that the
Father of the Universe was punishing the Egyp-
tians as an act of grace on the poor oppressed
subjects.

* *

In due course of time, by the grace of the
Father of the Universe, the sons of Israel began to
find prosperity and freedom.

CHAPTER IV

1 The Supreme God, Father of the Uni-
verse, out of great compassion for sinners, desired
to appear on earth in human form.

2 That Incarnation appeared as a soul sepa-
rate from that Supreme Soul who has no begin-
ning, no end, and is above all consequence.

3 [He] descended to show how a soul can
unite with God and realize eternal bliss,

4 And assumed a human form to demon-
strate in his own life how a mortal can achieve
righteousness and separate the soul from the mortal


ON THE TRAIL TO HIMIS 2 61

body in order to gain immortality and proceed to
that heaven of the Father of the Universe, where
there exists eternal bliss.

5 [He] appeared as an immaculate child in
the land of Israel. The child became the spokesman
ofthe Father of the Universe to explain the transient
nature of the body and the glory of the soul.

6 The parents of this child were poor but very
devout and of high birth. They disregarded earthly
possessions in order to proclaim God's name and his
glory and believed that the Lord of the Universe had
made them suffer only to test them.

7 The Lord of the Universe blessed this first-
born child to reward their patience and sent him to
save the sinners and cure the afflicted.

8 This divine child was named Issa. During
his childhood he exhorted people to be devoted
and respectful to the one Lord of the Universe and
sinners to abstain from sinful acts and to repent.

9 People from everywhere came to listen to
the wise sayings from the mouth of this child, and
the sons of Israel unanimously proclaimed that the
infinite, merciful Supreme Soul who knows no
beginning, no end, existed in the child.

10 In the course of time, Issa entered his
thirteenth year. The Israelites, according to their
national custom, get married at this age. His
parents used to live like ordinary householders.

11 That humble cottage of theirs grew clam-
orous with the arrival of the rich and aristocratic.
Everyone was eager to have Issa as their son-in-law.


12 Issa was unwilling to marry. He had al-
ready attained fame by his expositions of the nature
of God. At the proposal of marriage, he decided to
leave his father's house in secret.

13. At that time the desire was very strong in
his mind to attain perfection through devotional
service to God and that he should study religion
with those who had attained enlightenment.

14 He left Jerusalem, joined a group of trad-
ers, and set out for the land of Sind [the lower Indus
valley, South Pakistan] where they used to purchase
merchandise for export to various countries.

CHAPTER V

1 He (Jesus), at the age of fourteen, crossed
northern Sind and entered the sacred land of the
Aryans....

2 While traveling alone along the land of the
five rivers [the Punjab], his majestic features,
peaceful face, and broad forehead prompted the
devoted Jains to recognize him as one who had
received the mercy of the Lord.

3 And they asked him to stay in their tem-
ples. But he did not accept their invitations, be-
cause he did not want any attention from others at
that time.

4 In due course he arrived at the home of
Jagannath, the country of Vyasa-Krishna's mortal
play,* and became a disciple of the Brahmins. He

‘[Mortal play describes the action of a god who plays a role—i.e., takes a mortal
form, which begins with birth and ends with death—for a specific purpose, such
as the incarnations of Krishna.—TRANS.|


THE LOST YEARS OF JESUS 2 3

Tibetan Buddhism. Notovitch was received by a
lama who told him that in the archives at Lhasa,
capital of Tibet and at that time the home of the
Dalai Lama, there were several thousand ancient
scrolls discussing the life of the prophet Issa, the
Eastern name for Jesus. While there was no such
document at Mulbekh, the lama said that some of
the principal monasteries had copies.

Notovitch was determined to find the records
of the life of Issa, even if it meant going to Lhasa.
Leaving Mulbekh, he visited several convents
where the monks had heard of the documents but
said they did not possess copies. He soon reached
the great convent Himis, located about twenty-five
miles from Leh, the capital of Ladakh.

Himis, named by its founder “Sangye chi ku
sung thug chi ten” ("the support of the meaning of
Buddha's precepts")," is the largest and most cele-
brated monastery in Ladakh; it is also the scene of
a well-known religious festival held annually in
honor of Saint Padma Sambhava. It depicts Bud-
dha's victory over the forces of evil, the driving
away of evil spirits, and the ultimate triumph of
good over evil.

The convent is tucked away in a hidden valley
in the Himalayas, 11,000 feet above sea level.
Some who have visited it say it brings to mind
visions of Shangri-La. Because of its position, it is
one of the few gompas that has escaped destruction
by the invading armies of Asiatic conquerors. As a
result, according to L. Austine Waddell, "more


ON THE TRAIL TO HIMIS 2 61

endeared himself to everyone and it was there that
he began reading, learning, and expounding the
Vedas. .* *

Next he lived for six years in Rajagriha, Kasi,
and other holy places. Then he set out for
Kapilavastu, the birthplace of Lord Buddha.

Having lived there for six years with the Bud-
dhist monks, he learned Pali thoroughly and began
studying the Buddhist scriptures....

From there he toured Nepal and the Hima-
layas. . and then proceeded westward.

Gradually he arrived in Persia, where the
doctrines of Zarathustra were followed.”...

... 500on his fame spread everywhere....

Thus he returned to his homeland at the age
of twenty-nine and began spreading the word of
peace amongst his oppressed countrymen.

The reverend lama said... three or four years after
he [Jesus] left his body, the original manuscript was
compiled in Pali from descriptions of all those
Tibetans who met him at that time, as well as from
descriptions of the traders who, with their own eyes,
witnessed his crucifixion by the king of his country.

There is no doubt that if all the scholarly
opinions that are current in various places regard-
ing Christ’s sojourn in India are collected and
published in a book, it would prove to be a valuable
document.

*At that time Jesus halted at a wayside pond near Kabul to wash his hands and
feet, and rested there for a while. That pond still exists. It is known as "Issa-
pond." To mark the event, every year a fair is held at this place. This is
mentioned in an Arabic book, Tariq-A-Ajhan.




Chapter Four

Legends of the east

Nicholas Roerich
Excerpts from Altai-Himalaya, Heart of Asia,
and Himalaya, with original texts on Saint Issa


NICHOLAS ROERICH


Roerich the Man,
His Expedition and Finds

QO: would have to look far and wide to find a
greater diversity of talent resident in one man:
archaeologist, anthropologist, explorer, hunter, diplo-
mat, mystic, poet, author and lecturer, artist, set and
costume designer, conservator of culture—Nicholas
Roerich, the consummate Renaissance man.

His life was a quest for Truth. Twice that quest
took him to Central Asia—on the first expedition
(1924-28) to Sikkim, through Punjab, Kashmir,
Ladakh, Karakoram, Khotan, Kashgar, Karashahr,
Urumchi, Irtysh, the Altai Mountains, the Oyrot
region, Mongolia, Central Gobi, Kansu, Tsaidam,
Tibet, and, secretly, to Moscow.

Born in St. Petersburg, Russia, on October 10,
1874, Nicholas Konstantinovich Roerich spent
much of his youth near Gatchina, twenty-five miles
southwest of the city, at his family's rural estate,
Iswara.' There he developed a passion for hunting
and a fascination with natural history and archaeol-
ogy. He wrote adventure stories and epics for hunt-
ing magazines and, at the age of fifteen, illustrated
a story about a chance (and dangerous) encounter


266 ROERICH CHAPTER FOUR

he had with a bear. Michail O. Mikeshine, an
artist, saw his drawings, encouraged his art work,
and gave him his first painting lessons.

Nicholas wanted to pursue a career in art but
his father, a prominent barrister, determined that
he should study law. So he studied both, enrolling
in the Academy of Fine Arts and the University of
St. Petersburg in 1893.

In 1898, he was appointed to a professorship at
the Imperial Archaeological Institute, and in 1901
he married Helena Ivanovna Shaposhnikov, a niece
of the famous composer Modest P. Musorgski and
grandniece of Field Marshal Mikhail I. Kutuzov,
the Russian general whose strategy of indefinite
retreat helped defeat Napoleon in 1812. They had
two sons—George, a scientist, and Sviatoslav, an
artist.

Helena was a distinguished and most gracious
lady of letters, spiritually profound, intellectually
brilliant—an accomplished pianist and a prolific
writer in the esoteric tradition of Eastern religion.
Besides the books credited to her, she reportedly
authored works under as many as five pseudonyms,
including Josephine Saint-Hilaire and Natalie
Rokotoff.2 From time to time, it is possible to catch
glimpses of her activities. She carried on a corre-
spondence with President Franklin D. Roosevelt in
1934, for example—which suggests the important
nature of her work.' But on the whole, not much is
known about her because she was deliberately self-
effacing.


LEGENDS OF THE EAST 3 01

Not only were the Roerichs enormously
gifted, but they were also affectionate and inspir-
ing. "I want to say that no other people have ever
radiated such light and unconscious joy as Roerich
and Madame Roerich," wrote George Grebens-
tchikoff, an author and friend. "The days of our
meeting were days of the highest uplift of spirit
both for my wife and myself; at the bidding of one
of the Roerichs either of us would have been ready
to make any sacrifice.'M

In the early 1900s, while the Roerichs trav-
eled widely throughout Russia and Europe, Profes-
sor Roerich painted, undertook archaeological
excavations, studied architecture, lectured, and
wrote lucidly on art and archaeology. At the invita-
tion of ballet impresario Sergei P. Diaghilev, he
became a member of the famous St. Petersburg
World of Art (Mir Iskusstva) society and served for
a time as its president. Through its journal, the
society "sought to express the ideal of Art for Art's
sake," a concept in which "Art was seen as a form
of mystical experience, a means through which
eternal beauty could be expressed and communi-
cated—almost a new kind of religion."5

In 1906, Roerich was appointed director of
the School for the Encouragement of the Fine Arts
in Russia. In 1907, he began applying his talents to
stage and costume design, and later designed sets
for Diaghilev and for Igor Stravinsky's ballet The
Rite of Spring. The following year he became a
member of the Board of the Imperial Society of


268 ROERICH CHAPTER FOUR

Architecture and in 1909 was elected academician
of the Russian Imperial Academy of Fine Arts.

Roerich led a productive and adventurous life
and was often at the forefront of important events.
At the start of the Bolshevik Revolution in March
1917, Maxim Gorki called his countrymen in-
volved in the arts to a meeting in St. Petersburg.
They elected a Council of Art Affairs which met at
the Winter Palace. Roerich served as its chairman
for two months.

At that time he was a candidate for the office of
minister of fine arts and was asked to serve in the
government in this or some other capacity. In
discussing a lost collection of valuable old paintings
belonging to Roerich, the American Magazine of
Art (June 1921) noted that the fate of the paintings
was "unknown, because he would not accept the
high post offered him by the Bolsheviks." Sensing
the impending catastrophe, he took his family to
Finland, thus drawing the curtain on his early
career in Mother Russia.

At the invitation of Dr. Robert Harshe, direc-
tor of the Chicago Art Institute, Roerich came to
the United States in 1920. He had already executed
more than 2,500 paintings and was an_inter-
nationally acclaimed artist. Nonetheless, he cre-
ated an immediate artistic sensation.

"Roerich's paintings are so great because of
their affirmation, their great surety, in this restless
day," wrote noted art critic Olin Downes. "In the
midst of our modern society, so positive and so


LECENDSOFTHEEAST 269

limited, he gives to his fellow-artists a prophetic
example of the goal they must reach—the expres-
sion of the Inner Life."’

His work contains scenes of nature, themes
inspired by history, architecture, religion—many in
the style of the ancient Russian church paintings,
others mystical, allegorical, epic, or sublime, and
some which, like The Last Angel, are prophetic. He
was influenced by a great many artists—from Arhip
I. Kuindjy, his instructor at the Academy of Fine
Arts, to Gauguin and Van Gogh—and a variety of
schools of art. But his was a school of his own making.

His style, however, is difficult to describe be-
cause, as architect Claude Bragdon put it, he belongs
to an elect fraternity of artists that includes da Vinci,
Rembrandt, Blake—and, in music, Beethoven—
whose work has "a unique, profound and indeed a
mystical quality which differentiates them from
their contemporaries, making it impossible to clas-
sify them in any known category or to ally them
with any school, because they resemble themselves
only—and one another, like some spaceless and
timeless order of initiates."®

Roerich was an artist of incredible empire
whose paintings—often alive with exhilarating
color—make a tangible impact on the viewer.
Henry A. Wallace (secretary of agriculture 1933-
40, vice president of the United States 1941-45)
said Roerich's paintings "gave him a smooth feel-
ing inside."® And some claimed they were literally
transported to other realms by his artistry, or at


270 ROERICH CHAPTER FOUR

least had visions thereof: "The genius of Roerich's
fantasy reaches the border of clairvoyance," wrote
the great Russian novelist Leonid Andreyev.”

In his essay "The Inner Meaning of Roerich's
Art," Ivan Narodny proclaimed, "The very mo-
ment when I saw the paintings of Nicholas Roerich
exhibited at the Kingore Galleries in New York,
I felt they lured my eyes into an unknown wonder-
land, by evoking my soul to hear the sounds of
chimes, choruses, organs, orchestras and aeolian
harps.... Looking at Roerich's pictures I have been
lured to meditations, dreams and spiritual tears-
emotions experienced by pilgrims while kneeling in
prayer before the wonder-working ikons.""

In support of the verisimilitude of those who
report such lofty visions—or exclaim that "Roerich's
art is out of this world!”—while in orbit, Yuri A.
Gagarin, the first man in space (April 12, 1961),
wrote in his journal: "Rays were blazing through
the atmosphere of the earth, the horizon became
bright orange, gradually passing into all the colors
of the rainbow: from light blue to dark blue, to
violet and then to black. What an indescribable
gamut of colors! Just like the paintings of the artist
Nicholas Roerich."!?

In America, Roerich traveled widely, exhib-
ited his works, circulated in the best circles, lec-
tured at the most exclusive girls schools and at
Marshall Field's department store, where he taught
on the "spiritual garment" and harmonizing the
human aura with clothing."


J 16 ELIZABETH CLARE PROPHET CHAPTER ONE

interesting and curious objects, books, dresses,
masks, etc., are found at Himis than in any other
monastery in Ladak."4

While visiting Himis in 1974-75, Tibetolo-
gists David L. Snellgrove and Tadeusz Skorupski
were told that "other monasteries, availing them-
selves of its concealed position, had often in the
past brought their treasures there for safe keeping,
and there is certainly a considerable collection
locked away in a safe room, known as the 'Dark
Treasury'.. .which is said to be opened only when
one treasurer hands on to a successor."

At Himis, Notovitch witnessed one of the
numerous mystery plays performed by the lamas.
Afterward, he asked the chief lama if he had ever
heard of Issa. The lama said that the Buddhists
greatly respected Issa but that no one knew much
about him other than the chief lamas who had read
the records of his life.

In the course of their conversation, the lama
mentioned that among the many scrolls at Himis
"are to be found descriptions of the life and acts of
the Buddha Issa, who preached the holy doctrine in
India and among the children of Israel." According
to the lama, the documents, brought from India to
Nepal and then to Tibet, were originally written in
Pali, the religious language of the Buddhists. The
copy at Himis had been translated into Tibetan.

Notovitch asked, "Would you be committing
a sin to recite these copies to a stranger?" While
the lama was willing to make them available—


LECENDSOFTHEEAST 271

He founded Cor Ardens (the International
Society of Artists) and the Master Institute of
United Arts in 1921, and Corona Mundi (Interna-
tional Art Center) in 1922. After planning the first
of his expeditions to Asia, he embarked for India
in 1923 to prepare for the journey.

The trustees of the Master Institute of United
Arts founded the Roerich Museum in 1923. The
museum housed a great number of Roerich's paint-
ings but, reflecting Roerich's concept of the unity
of art, it quickly became, in the words of historian
Robert C. Williams, "a genuine cultural enter-
prise, sponsoring exhibits, lectures, and concerts
by distinguished artists, musicians, and writers
throughout the late 1920s and early 1930s.""

In 1928, Roerich founded the Urusvati Hima-
layan Research Institute in the lovely Kulu Valley
in Nagar, India, which was a center for the study
of ethnographic and archaeological materials.

In the course of his life, Roerich produced an
astonishing number of paintings—about 7,000—
wrote more than 1,200 works of all kinds, was a if
not the (sometimes unseen) force behind placing
the Great Seal of the United States on the dollar
bill, and was nominated for the Nobel Peace Prize
in 1929 and 1935 for his efforts to promote interna-
tional peace through art and culture and to protect
art treasures in time of war.

As early as 1904, Roerich proposed a treaty to
protect the world's cultural endowment, suggested
the idea to Czar Nicholas II in 1914 and formally


272 ROERICH CHAPTER FOUR

drafted it into the language of international law
in 1929.

The Third International Roerich Peace Ban-
ner Convention, November 1933, was a turning
point in the campaign to ratify what became popu-
larly known as the Roerich Pact. In effect, the pact
obligated nations to respect museums, universities,
cathedrals, and libraries as they did hospitals.
Where hospitals flew the Red Cross flag in time of
war, cultural institutions would fly Roerich's
"Banner of Peace"—a white field with three red
spheres enclosed by a red circle.

Efforts to promote the pact were spearheaded
by the secretary of agriculture, Henry A. Wal-
lace—at that time an admirer and, some say,
spiritual disciple of Roerich. The meeting was no
small affair among the Washington elite; Senator
Robert F. Wagner served as the honorary chairman
and fourteen U.S. senators, two congressmen, six-
teen governors, the superintendent of the U.S.
Military Academy, and several college presidents
were honorary members of the convention."

On April 15, 1935, Roerich finally saw a Pan-
American treaty embodying the pact signed at the
White House by representatives of the United States
and twenty Latin American nations.'®

Biographers have written a great deal about all
phases of Roerich's life, except one: the capstone of
his endeavors, the force which gave direction,
unity, and meaning to his multiple activities—his
spiritual life.


LEGENDS OF THE EAST 3 01

Somewhere along the line, the Roerichs ac-
quired a profound understanding of the literature
and traditions of esoteric religion—especially eso-
teric Buddhism. No doubt Nicholas Roerich's inti-
mate knowledge of the ways of the East, combined
with his diverse experience and great learning,
explains why he was received with honor almost
everywhere he went on his first Central Asian
expedition, why the Chinese marveled at his learn-
ing and referred to him as "the Initiate," and why
the Mongolians reportedly said, "Such great uni-
versal personalities as Roerich are walking the path
of the Bodhisattvas of the highest order as absolute
lights of the century
considers the visit of Professor Roerich...a great
honor and a joy."””

It is not easy to trace the development of
Roerich's spiritual life. The veil of obscurity, ac-
cording to some of his followers, is the result of an
intentional effort by the Roerichs to retain a reverent
circle of privacy around their personal lives and
inner experiences.

One of Roerich's biographers, Dr. Garabed
Paelian, believed the first stirrings began in
Nicholas’ early childhood with the appearance of
a white-robed figure in his dreams.'* Some of
Roerich's followers claim that his painting instruc-
tor Kuindjy, a man with Saint Francis-like qualities,
was for a time his guru. In a tribute to Kuindjy,
Roerich recalled, "I was happy to have as my first
teacher an extraordinary man. The eminent Master

Therefore, our country



Kuindjy was not only a remarkable artist, but also a
great Teacher of life."

Some believe that Kuindjy might have intro-
duced Roerich to esoteric ideas and literature. Just
what Kuindjy taught Roerich other than painting
is shrouded in mystery, and whether he was his
guru is a matter of considerable debate. Neverthe-
less, in an essay, "Guru—The Teacher," published
in Shambhala (1930), Roerich says Kuindjy was "a
real Guru for his pupils in the high Hindu concep-
tion." He speaks of Kuindjy having "the authority of
the Guru" but states: "from where his [Kuindjy's]
conception of real Guruship in the refined eastern
understanding arose, I do not know."?°

In any case, the Roerichs were briefly mem-
bers of the Theosophical Society, studied its litera-
ture, eventually translated Helena P. Blavatsky's
Secret Doctrine into Russian and in 1919 or 1920,
according to the reports of some of their followers,
made contact with the great Mahatmas of the East,
Morya and Koot Hoomi.

While the Roerichs lived in the United States, a
group of devotees familiar with their spiritual activ-
ities recognized Nicholas as a guru. Over the years,
the Roerichs authored a large number of books on a
wide variety of spiritual topics. Most have no
biographical information at all. Some do not even
identify the author, and others, at least in the case of
Helena Roerich, were written under pseudonyms.

Drawn by their undying love of the Orient and
the many secrets it held for them, the Roerichs


LEGENDS OF THE EAST 3 01

departed in 1923 for a four-and-a-half-year epic
tour of Asia. The expedition included Nicholas,
Helena, their son George (the scientist), and several
other Europeans. Their son Sviatoslav (the artist)
and Lama Lobzang Mingyur Dorje, a scholar of
Tibetan literature, joined the party for a leg of the
journey. They traveled through Sikkim, India,
Kashmir, Ladakh, Tibet, China, Mongolia, and
Russia. In short, their route encircled Central Asia.
"Of course, as an artist my main aspiration in
Asia was towards artistic work," Roerich wrote in
Heart of Asia, a synopsis of his travel diary, "and it
is even difficult to estimate how soon I can embody
all my artistic impressions and sketches—so gen-
erous are these gifts of Asia. No knowledge acquired
in literature or in museums empowers one to
express Asia or any other country, unless he has
seen it with his own eyes and unless he has made at
least some notes and sketches on the sites them-
selves. Conviction, this magic and intangible prop-
erty of creation, comes only in the continuous
cumulation of real conceptions. It is true, moun-
tains everywhere are mountains, water everywhere
is water, sky everywhere is sky, and men everywhere
are men. But nevertheless, if seated before the Alps,
you attempt to picture the Himalayas, something
inexplicable but convincing will be lacking.

"In addition to its artistic aims, our Expedi-
tion planned to study the position of the ancient
monuments of Central Asia, to observe the present
condition of religions and creeds, and to note the


276 ROERICH CHAPTER FOUR

traces of the great migrations of nations."?! The
expedition fulfilled its aims abundantly.

For much of the time, the Roerichs were out
of touch with the West. After a long silence, this
telegram reached New York on May 24, 1928. Its
terse sentences impart a flavor of the journey:

"Roerich American Expedition after many
hardships has reached Himalayas. Thus ended big
Central Asiatic Expedition. Many artistic and
scientific results. Already sent several series of
paintings to New York. Hope last sending from
Mongolia safely reached you. Many observations
regarding Buddhism.

"Expedition started in 1924 from Sikhim
through Punjab, Kashmir, Ladak, Karakorum,
Khotan, Kashgar, Karashahr, Urumchi, Irtysh,
Altai Mountains, Oyrot region, Mongolia, Central
Gobi, Kansu, Tsaidam, Tibet.

"Peaceful American flag encircled Central
Asia. Everywhere warmly greeted except Khotan
and Lhasa Governments. Further movement Expe-
dition from Khotan assisted by British Consul at
Kashgar. On Tibetan territory have been attacked
by armed robbers. Superiority of our firearms pre-
vented bloodshed. In spite of Tibetan passports
Expedition forcibly stopped by Tibetan authorities
on Oct. 6, two days north of Nagchu. With inhu-
man cruelty Expedition has been detained for
five months at altitude of 15,000 feet in summer
tents amidst severe cold about 40 degrees below
Centigrade.


LEGENDS OF THE EAST 3 01

"Expedition suffered from want of fuel and
fodder. During stay in Tibet five men, Mongols,
Buriats and Tibetans died and ninety caravan ani-
mals perished. By order of authorities all letters and
wires addressed to Lhasa Government and Cal-
cutta British authorities seized. Forbidden to speak
to passing caravans. Forbidden to buy foodstuffs
from population. Money and medicines came to
an end. The presence of three women in caravan
and medical certificate about heart weakness not
taken into consideration. With great difficulties on
March 4, Expedition started southward. All nine
European members of the Expedition safe. Coura-
geously bore hardships of exceptionally severe
Winter. Greetings."

During the trek, despite overwhelming obsta-
cles, Roerich executed some 500 paintings. In this
book we have reproduced sixteen of his works done
in tempera—some of which were completed on the
expedition—and a portrait of the artist in oil by his
son Sviatoslav. Roerich also kept a diary on the
journey, later published under the title Altai-
Himalaya. It is a loosely stitched tapestry of
thoughts on science, archaeology, and religion
combined with a swift-moving travelogue. A com-
pilation of Roerich's "thoughts upon horseback and
in the tent," it was once characterized as "the
Symphony of Asia."?' We know of no comparable
work in existence. It is every whit a monument of
beauty as his breathtaking, soul-effusing paintings.

In the course of his observation of religious


278 ROERICH CHAPTER FOUR

practices, Roerich accumulated a great deal of
evidence, both oral and written, not merely cor-
roborating Notovitch's findings but adding new
texts to the body already collected. Fortunately for
students of the lost years, of world religions and
mysticism in twentieth-century art, the search for
Saint Issa will take them to the unexplored archives
of Nicholas and Helena Roerich and a world of
transcendent beauty that beckons spiritual pilgrims
seeking to enter the twenty-first century with integ-
rity and the strength to meet world chaos with
knowing and calm.

"The expedition left New York in May, 1923,
and in December of the same year reached Darjee-
ling in British Sikkim," George Roerich noted in
his diary, Trails to Inmost Asia. "Here a base was
established and several trips were conducted into
Sikkim. The whole of 1924 was spent in Sikkim in
preparation for the more extensive journey into
inner Asia."2"!

The Roerichs left Darjeeling on March 6,
1925, and headed for Srinagar, Kashmir. There
they commissioned skilled artisans to prepare the
tremendous amount of gear they would need
because "a journey such as that from Kashmir
to Chinese Turkestan over the highest mountain
route in the world," wrote George, "requires un-
usual forethought and careful consideration."

"The winter outfit for the cold weather on the
mountain passes and the winter in Chinese Tur-
kestan consisted of fur coats lined with pashmina,


LEGENDS OF THE EAST 3 01

Gilgit fur boots, fur caps, fur socks, and fur
sleeping bags. We also ordered several tents of
waterproof Willesden canvas with warm _ pattoo
lining. These tents had to be specially constructed
to withstand the rough traveling and the mountain
gales. They consisted of two flies, the outer fly
reaching the ground to prevent the strong wind of
the higher uplands from penetrating beneath and
lifting the tent. The tent poles were of thick bam-
boo with strong metal joints, and the tent pegs of
galvanized iron."

On April 15, the family moved to Kashmir's
hill station, Gulmarg, where they spent the rest of
April, May, June, and July. On August 8, they
started their journey along the Leh Treaty Route,
eighty-two ponies in tow.

"Flies, mosquitoes, fleas, earwigs! All possi-
ble gifts has Kashmir. Our departure was not
without bloodshed," wrote Roerich in Altai-
Himalaya. "In Tangmarg a band of ruffians at-
tacked our caravan and began to beat our men
with iron rods; seven of our men were hurt. It was
necessary to preserve order with revolvers and
rifles. In Ghund, our hostlers fed the horses with
poisonous grass; the horses began to shiver and
finally lay down. The entire night they had to be
walked up and down. My horse, Mastan, suffered
especially, and also Sabsa, that of George. The
drivers made fires around the ammunition box. A
wildcat crept into the tent under George's bed."?6

In Heart of Asia he recorded: "The ancient


280 ROERICH CHAPTER FOUR

caravan road from Srinagar to Leh is covered in a
seventeen days' march. But it is usually advised to
take a few days more. Only cases of extreme need
can induce the traveler to make this journey with-
out interruption. Such unforgettable places, as
Maulbeck, Lamayuru, Basgu, Kharbu, Saspul,
Spithug, arrest one and retain themselves forever in
one's memory, both from an artistic and a his-
torical point of view.

"Maulbeck—now already a declining monas-
tery, to judge by the ruins*must have once been
a real stronghold, boldly occupying the summit of
a huge rock. Near Maulbeck, on the main road,
you are startled by an ancient gigantic image of
Maitreya. You feel that not a Tibetan hand, but
probably a Hindu, carved this image at the time of
Buddhist glory

"One must have a sense of beauty and of
fearless self denial to build strongholds on such
heights. In many such castles, long subterranean
passages, leading to a river, were hewn in the
rocks, so that a loaded donkey could just manage to
pass there. This fairy-tale of subterranean pas-
sages, as we Shall see, has created many of the best
sagas. As in Sikkim, the Ladaki lamas turned out
to be kind, tolerant of other faiths and hospitable to
travelers, as Buddhists should be

"In Nimu, a small village before Leh, 11,000
feet high, we had an experience which can under
no circumstances be overlooked. It would be most
interesting to hear of analogous cases. It was after


THE LOST YEARS OF JESUS 2 3

"that which belongs to God belongs also to
man"—he was not sure where they were. He told
Notovitch that if he ever returned to the convent,
he would be glad to show them to him.

Not wanting to compromise his chance of
seeing the records by appearing too interested, yet
determined to find them before he was forced to
return to Russia, Notovitch left Himis and began
looking for a pretext that would allow him to return
to the monastery. Several days later, he sent the
lama gifts of an alarm clock, a watch, and a
thermometer with a message stating his desire to
visit Himis again.

Notovitch said he planned to go to Kashmir
prior to returning to Himis but "Fate ordained
otherwise." Near the gompa of Pintak, Notovitch
fell from his horse, fractured his leg, and used his
injury as an excuse to return to Himis, which was
only a half-day's journey away.

While the Russian was convalescing, the
chief lama finally assented to his "earnest en-
treaties," produced "two large bound volumes with
leaves yellowed by time," and read aloud the sec-
tions dealing with Issa. Notovitch's interpreter
translated the text, which the Russian journalist
carefully wrote in his notebook.

The biography of Issa, according to Noto-
vitch, was composed of isolated verses which were
untitled and scattered out of sequence throughout
the text. The Russian author grouped the verses
and put them in order, and then published the


LEGENDS OF THE EAST 3 01

a clear, calm day. We camped in tents. At about
10 p.m. I was already asleep, when Mrs. Roerich
approached her bed to remove the woolen rug. But
hardly had she touched the wool, when a big rose-
violet flame of the color of an intense electric
discharge shot up, forming a seemingly whole
bonfire, about a foot high. A shout of Mrs.
Roerich, ‘Fire, fire!’ awoke me. Jumping up, I saw
the dark silhouette of Mrs. Roerich and behind
her, a moving flame, clearly illuminating the tent.
Mrs. Roerich tried to extinguish the flame with her
hands, but the fire flashed through her fingers,
escaping her hands, and burst into several smaller
fires. The effect of the touch was a_ slightly
warming effect, but there was no burning, nor
sound, nor odor. Gradually the flames diminished
and finally disappeared, leaving no traces whatso-
ever on the bed cover. We had occasion to study
many electric phenomena, but I must say that we
never experienced one of such proportions.

"In Darjeeling, a spheroidic lightning passed
only two feet from my head. In Gulmarg, in
Kashmir, during an uninterrupted thunderstorm of
three days, when hail fell as big as a pigeon's egg,
we studied a great variety of lightning. In the
Trans-Himalayas, we repeatedly experienced the
effect upon ourselves of different electric phenom-
ena. I remember how in Chunargen, at an alti-
tude of 15,000 feet, I awoke at night in my tent,
and touching my bedrug, was surprised at the
blue light flashing from my fingertips as though


282 ROERICH CHAPTER FOUR

enwrapping my hand. Believing that this could
occur only in contact with woolen material,
I touched the linen pillowcase. The effect was
again the same. Then I touched all kinds of ob-
jects—wood, paper, canvas; in each case the blue
light flashed up, intangible, soundless and odorless.

"The entire Himalayan region offers excep-
tional fields for scientific research. Nowhere else, in
the whole world, can such varied conditions be
concentrated: peaks up to almost thirty thousand
feet; lakes at an elevation of fifteen thousand feet;
deep valleys with geysers and all types of hot and
cold mineral springs; the most unsuspected vegeta-
tion—all this vouches for unprecedented results in
new scientific discoveries. If one could compare
scientifically the conditions of the Himalayas with
the uplands of other parts of the world, what
remarkable analogies and antitheses would arise!
The Himalayas are a veritable Mecca for a sincere
scientist. When we recalled the book of Professor
Millikan, The Cosmic Ray’, we imagined the won-
derful possibilities which this great scientist would
find on these Himalayan heights. May these dreams
become true, in the name of true science!"27

In only eighteen days, the Roerichs' caravan
arrived in Leh. George wrote, "Our expedition
remained in the capital of Ladak from August 26 to
September 19,1925, except for several days spent on
a journey to the famous Hemis Monastery and other
places of interest round the town. Much ofthe time


LECENDSOFTHEEAST 283

during this stay was occupied by preparations for the
next difficult portion of the journey across the great
mountain route to Chinese Turkestan."*

The interlude at Himis was not a pleasant
one. Professor Roerich was unimpressed by the
monastery. He did, however, find evidence of the
Issa manuscripts, although he does not specify
whether the texts he later published were copied
there. Otherwise disappointing, the Himis experi-
ence is outlined in his notes in Himalaya, a
monograph published in 1926 from portions of his
diary mailed home:

"One must also see the reverse side of Bud-
dhism—let us go to Hemis. Already approaching
one feels the strange atmosphere of darkness and
dejection. The stupas are with strange fearful im-
ages—ugly faces. Black ravens fly above and black
dogs are gnawing at the bones. And the canyon
tightly incloses itself. Of course, the temple and
the houses are all huddled together. And the ob-
jects of service are heaped together in dark corners
like the loot of robbers. The lamas are half-literate.
Our guide laughs, 'Hemis, a big name, but a little
monastery.’ Of course small, not according to size,
but to inner meaning. Here is apparent prejudice
and greed. The only fine thing about it was that
upon the neighboring sharp rocks, at morning, the
deer appeared and, standing long upon the cliffs,
turned their heads to greet the sun."


284 ROERICH CHAPTER FOUR

"It is an old monastery founded by a great
lama who left a book about Chambhalla and these
manuscripts are lying down below, out of sight,
probably feeding the mice."

"Regarding the manuscripts of Christ—first
there was a complete denial. Of course denial first
comes from the circle of missionaries. Then slowly,
little by little, are creeping fragmentary reticent
details, difficult to obtain. Finally it appears—that
about the manuscripts, the old people in Ladak
have heard and know."

"And such documents as manuscripts about
Christ and the Book of Chambhalla lie in the
‘darkest’ place. And the figure of the lama—the
compiler of the book—stands like an idol in some
sort of fantastic headgear. And how many other
relics have perished in dusty corners? For the
tantrik-lamas have no interest in them. It was
necessary to see this other side of Buddhism."

"And how simple it is to brush aside this grime
and dust of fanaticism! How simple to restore the
stirring mural paintings! How easy to purify and to
cleanse the finely wrought statues! Nor is it difficult
to bring the monastic organizations back to the full
meaning of the working order, according to the
teachings of the greatest Lion (Sinha) —Buddha.""°


LECENDSOFTHEEAST 285

Leh received the Roerichs with much greater
honor. They were invited to stay in the king's
crumbling but majestic seventeenth-century pal-
ace which dominates the horizon. "The entire
atmosphere at Ladak seemed to be under benevo-
lent signs for us," recalled Roerich.

"The city of Leh, the residence of the former
Maharajah of Ladak, now conquered by Kashmir,
is a typical Tibetan town, with numerous clay
walls, temples and long rows of Suburgans, which
lend a solemn silence to the place. This city, on a
high mountain, is crowned by the eight-story pal-
ace of the Maharajah. At the latter's invitation, we
stopped there, choosing for our dwelling the top
floor of the stronghold, which trembled under the
violent gusts of wind. During our occupancy a
door and part of the wall collapsed. But the won-
derful view from the roof made us forget the
instability of the castle.

"Below the palace, lies the whole city: bazaars
crowded with noisy caravans, fruit orchards and,
around the city, great fields of barley from which
garlands of merry songs resound at the close of the
day's work. The Ladaki women walk about pictur-
esquely in their high fur caps, with turned up ear-
pieces. Down their backs hang long head-bands
decorated with a great amount of turquoise and
small metal ornaments. Across the shoulders, like
an ancient Byzantine korsno, is generally worn the
skin ofa yak, fastened on the right shoulder with a
fibula. Among the richer women, this korsno is of


286 ROERICH CHAPTER FOUR

colored cloth, resembling still more the real Byzan-
tine ikons. And the fibulae on their right shoulder
might have been excavated in Nordic and Scandi-
navian tumuli.

"Not far from Leh, on a stony hill, are an-
cient graves, believed to be prehistoric and recall-
ing Druidic antiquities. Not far away is also the
place of the old Mongolian Kham, which tried to
conquer Ladak. In this valley also are Nestorian
crosses, once more recalling how widely spread in

Asia was Nestorianism and Manicheism."*"

And among the riot and color of the Asian
bazaar, the arrival and departure of caravans, the
bustling merchants, the breathtaking beauty of
the Himalayas, the ancient traditions surrounding
the city of Leh, arose the legends of Issa.

"In Leh, we again encountered the legend of

*Nestorianism: doctrine set forth by fifth-century bishop of Constantinople
Nestorius which stated that there were two separate persons—human and
divine—in the incarnate Christ as opposed to the orthodox teaching that Christ
was a divine person who assumed a human nature. After Nestorius' views were
condemned in 431 by the Council of Ephesus, supporters of his theology formed
a center of resistance at the famed theological school in Edessa. The school was
closed in 489 by imperial order and a small remnant of Nestorians migrated to
Persia (Iran). In 637, following the Arab conquest of Persia, the Nestorians were
recognized as a religious community and their scholars became influential in
the formation of Arao culture. Today most of their members, usually referred to
as Assyrian Christians, live in Iraq, Syria, and Iran. Manichaeism: religion
founded in Persia in the third century by Mani (c. 216-276). Mani, who
claimed apostleship under Jesus, believed himself to be the instrument of the
promised Paraclete and messenger of the Holy Spirit in the line of succession of
prophets or messengers of Cod, chief among them Zoroaster, Buddha, and
Christ. Mani's followers were vegetarians, believed in reincarnation, and fol-
lowed a ritual of prayer several times a day. Their religious practices also
included frequent fasting, almsgiving, and confession. Mani's syncretistic move-
ment was an early rival of the Christian church, which treated his doctrine as
heresy. He was persecuted by orthodox Zoroastrians as well and was martyred in
ftrsia by Zoroastrian priests. Manichaeism spread west through Egypt, North
Africa, and the Roman Empire—disappearing in the sixth century after fierce
persecution—and penetrated eastward as far as Chinese Turkestan, where it
lasted until about the tenth century.


LEGENDS OF THE EAST 3 01

Christ's visit to these parts. The Hindu postmaster
of Leh and several Ladaki Buddhists told us that in
Leh not far from the bazaar, there still exists a
pond, near which stood an old tree. Under this
tree, Christ preached to the people, before his
departure to Palestine. We also heard another leg-
end of how Christ, when young, arrived in India
with a merchant's caravan and how He continued
to study the higher wisdom in the Himalayas. We
heard several versions of this legend which has
spread widely throughout Ladak, Sinkiang and
Mongolia, but all versions agree on one point, that
during the time of His absence, Christ was in India
and Asia. It does not matter how and from where
the legend originated. Perhaps it is of Nestorian
origin. It is valuable to see that the legend is told in
full sincerity."

Altai-Himalaya adds more: "A good and sensi-
tive Hindu spoke meaningfully about the manu-
script of the life of Issa. 'Why does one always place
Issa in Egypt during the time of his absence from
Palestine? His young years of course were passed in
study. The traces of his learning have naturally
impressed themselves upon his later sermons. To
what sources do these sermons lead? What is there
in them of Egyptian? And why does one not see
traces of Buddhism—of India? It is difficult to
understand why the wandering of Issa by caravan
path into India and into the region now occupied by
Tibet, should be so vehemently denied.’

"The teachings of India were famed far and


288 ROERICH CHAPTER FOUR

wide; let us even recall the description of the life of
Appolonius of Tyana and his visits to Hindu sages.

"Another speaker reminds us that in Syria there
was found a slab with an inscribed governmental
edict about the persecution of the followers of Jesus
as enemies of the government. This archaeological
find must be curious for those who deny the
historicity of Jesus the Teacher. And how does one
explain the tiny coins used by the early Christians
in the catacombs? And the first catacombs them-
selves still exist. There are always those who love
scornfully to deny when something difficult enters
their consciousness; but then, knowledge is trans-
formed into seminaristic scholasticism and slander
is cultivated as a fine art. In what possible way could
a recent forgery penetrate into the consciousness of
the whole East? And where is the scientist who
could write a long treatise in Pali and Tibetan? We
do not know such an one

"Leh is a remarkable site. Here the legends
connected the paths of Buddha and Christ.
Buddha went through Leh northwards. Issa com-
muned here with the people on his way from
Tibet. Secretly and cautiously the legends are
guarded. It is difficult to sound them because
lamas, above all people, know how to keep silent.
Only by means of a common language—and not
merely that of tongue but also of inner understand-
ing—can one approach their significant mysteries.
One becomes convinced that every educated Ge-
long knows much. Even by his eyes one cannot


LEGENDSOFTHEEAST 289

guess when he agrees or inwardly laughs at you,
knowing more than yourself. How many stories
these silent ones can tell of the passing 'savants'
who have found themselves in the most ridiculous
positions! But now has come the time of the
illumination of Asia.""

Living in the palace of Ladakh, Roerich
gained inspiration for his paintings. "From this site
of the sermons of Issa, from its high terraces, one
must paint a series of all that can be seen from
here. In these high places, purified by winds,
occurred the signs of great communions. Of
course the places have changed. Destructions and
constructions succeeded one another. The con-
querors have brought new accumulations, but the
basic silhouette remains unchanged. The same
heavenly frames as formerly are crowning the
earth—the same glowing stars and the tides of sand
like a sea congealed. And the deafening winds,
sweeping up from the earth

Then a further confirmation of the manu-
scripts arose unsolicited.

"The old King Lama came himself. In spite of
his poverty he brought with him about ten accom-
panying lamas and relatives. From the conversa-
tion it became apparent that the family of the king
knows of the manuscripts about Issa. They also
informed us that many Mohammedans would like
to possess this document. Then followed conversa-
tion about prophecies connected with Shambhala,
about the dates and about that which fills reality


290 ROERICH CHAPTER FOUR

with beauty. The old King Lama departs and the
crowd in white kaftans bow before him in rever-
ence, simply and beautifully."

"How wonderful that George knows all neces-
sary Tibetan dialects. Only without a translator
will people here speak about spiritual things. Now
one must absorb, with full knowledge, with clear,
true approach. Curiosity is not fitting. Only insis-
tent love of knowledge!"

"The eighth of September [1925]. Letters from
America. Many messages will miss us here. The
letters traveled for six weeks—but successfully
reached the steamer."

"Upon the walls of the room chosen as the
dining-room are painted vases with many-colored
plants. On the bedroom walls are all the symbols
of Chintamani—the stone of the treasure of the
world. And the carved pillars, black from age,
support the dusky ceiling with its big Berendey-like
balusters. Little doors are above a high threshold
and the narrow windows are without glass. And
before nightfall the wind blows freely through the
passageways. The floor is covered with bright felt-
ing from Yarkand. And upon the lower terrace
a black dog barks—Tumbal, and the white dog,


J 18 ELIZABETH CLARE PROPHET CHAPTER ONE

document several years later along with his account
of its discovery.

The text is called The Life of Saint Issa: Best
of the Sons of Men, evidently a title of Notovitch's
own making. It is not a long work—244 verses
arranged into 14 chapters, the longest of which has
27 verses.

Some of it will sound familiar to anyone
acquainted with the Old and New Testaments:
the Egyptian captivity, the deliverance of the
Israelites by Mossa (Moses), the backsliding of the
Israelites followed by foreign invasions, subjuga-
tion by Rome, and finally the incarnation of a
divine child to poor but pious parents. God speaks
by the mouth of the infant and people come from
all over to hear him.

The narrative quickly jumps to Issa's_ thir-
teenth year, the first of the "lost years," and the
time, according to the story, "when an Israelite
should take a wife." His parents' house, humble
though it was, became a meeting place for the rich
and noble who desired to have as a son-in-law the
young Issa, "already famous for his edifying dis-
courses in the name of the Almighty."

Issa had set his sights on other goals. Accord-
ing to the manuscript Notovitch published, he
secretly left his father's house, departed Jerusalem
and, with a caravan of merchants, traveled east in
order to perfect himself in the "Divine Word" and
to study the laws of the great Buddhas.

They say Issa was fourteen when he crossed


LEGENDS OF THE EAST 3 01

Amdong, are our new fellow travelers. During the
night the wind whistles and the old walls shake.

"I. am painting in the upper chamber which
has its exit upon all the roofs. Its doors have broad
carved casements and the pillars have intricately
frescoed capitals. Stairs, steps and dark ceilings are
patterned by age. Where have I seen this chamber
before? Where have these bright colors sparkled?
Of course in the 'Snowmaiden’™ in the Chicago
setting. My dear ones enter and say: 'Well, here is
verily the true Berendey in his own chamber.’

"Berendeyevka ended sooner than we thought—
the fall does not tarry. One must pass Karakorum
before the autumn northeast wind approaches. The
way to Shayok is passable only a week longer.
Moreover, the people already have taken the bridges
apart for fuel, and the water has risen to the height
of a man. There remains the path through the
Khardong and Sasser passes. Many varied impera-
tive considerations cause us to hasten the date of
departure. With a large caravan one becomes a
subject."

"Karakorum—the black throne. Beyond lies
China—again the old patrimony of Buddha."

"In the courtyard they complete the loading
of the yaks. We are now setting out! And the day is
sparkling. September 18th, 1925.""4

'Roerich designed the stage settings and costumes for the 1921 Chicago Opera
Company production of Rimski-Korsakov's Snow Maiden.



292 ROERICH CHAPTER FOUR

Roerich mailed the foregoing portion of his
diary, along with the paintings thus far completed,
back to America. But the caravan did not leave
until September 19, and he wrote more about Issa:

"We learned how widespread are the legends
about Issa. It is important only to know the sub-
stance of these legends. The sermons related in
them, ofunity, of the significance of woman and all
the indications about Buddhism, are so remarkably
timely for us. Lamas know the significance of these
legends. And why do people resent and slander these
legends? Every one knows how to slander the so-
called Apocrypha.’ For slander does not need a high
intelligence. But who can fail to recognize that
many of the so-called Apocrypha’ are far more
basically true than many official documents? The
Kraledvorsky manuscript which was accepted by
every one happened to be a forgery—while many
genuine documents do not enter into any one's
consciousness. It is enough to remember the so-
called Evangel of the Ebionites. Such authorities as
Origen, Jerome and Epiphany speak about the
existence of this biography. Irenaeus, in the second
century, knows of it—and where is it now? It is
better, instead of useless discussions, humanly to
reflect on the facts and thoughts which are commu-
nicated in the legends of Issa, 'the best of human
sons.' Appreciate how close to contemporary con-
sciousness is the substance of these legends and be
astonished how widely all the East knows of them
and how persistent is the repetition of them.


LEGENDS OF THE EAST 3 01

"For a long time we loaded the yaks, horses,
mules, donkeys, sheep, dogs—a complete biblical
procession. The caravaneers are like a case of an
ethnographical museum. We passed the pool
where, according to tradition, Issa first taught. To
the left remain the prehistoric tombs. Behind
them, the place where Buddha, the ancient foun-
der of the Order, went northward through Khotan.
Farther on, ruins of structures and the garden
which speaks so much to us. We passed by stony
reliefs of Maitreya, which on the way, convey to
distant travelers their parting word of hope for the
future. The palace remained behind the rock, with
the temple Dukar—the illumined, many-armed
Mother of the World. The last sign from Leh was
the farewell of the women of Ladak. They went out
upon the road carrying the blessed milk of yaks.
They sprinkled the milk on the foreheads of the
horses and travelers in order to give them the power
of yaks, so needed on the steep inclines and upon
the slippery ribs of the glaciers. The women bade
us farewell."

Thus Roerich and his family departed for the
next leg of their pilgrimage—up the Khardong La
to follow the highest caravan route in the world.
For the next three years they were swallowed up in
the Heart of Asia.

One parting tale of Issa reached them after
they had crossed Khardong La September 23:

"The evening ends with an unexpected en-
counter with a Moslem. At the frontier of the


294 ROERICH CHAPTER FOUR

desert there proceeds a talk about Mohammed,
about the domestic life of the Prophet and about
his reverence for woman. The talk continues about
the movement of the Achmadis, and about legends
saying that the tomb of Jesus is in Srinagar and the
tomb of Mary in Kashgar. Again about the legends
of Issa! Moslems are especially interested in these
legends....

"Young friends, you must know all conditions
of the caravan life in the desert. Only upon such
ways will you learn to fight with the elements,
where each uncertain step is already an actual
death. There you will forget the number of days
and hours. There the stars will shine for you as
heavenly runes. The foundation of all teachings is
fearlessness. Not in bitter-sweet, summer suburban
camps, but on the severe heights, learn keenness of
thought and resourcefulness of action. Not only
during lectures, in well-heated auditoriums, but
upon the cold glaciers, realize the power of the
work of matter and you will understand that each
end is but the beginning of something still more
significant and beautiful.

"Again the piercing gale. The fire becomes
dim. The wings of the tent are flapping noisily —
they want to fly."%


The Ancient Texts
on Christ in India, Nepal,
Ladakh, and Tibet

Mi: of the account of Jesus' journey to the

East which Professor Roerich published from
an unnamed 1,500-year-old document bears a strik-
ing resemblance to Notovitch's Life of Saint Issa.
The chapter in which the verses appear, written in
1925, is a compilation of Roerich's observations
about religion, sandwiched between entries de-
scribing his journey in Sikkim and arrival in Kash-
mir and a chapter about his departure from Kashmir
and travels through Ladakh. He may have found
the manuscript at Himis, some other monastery in
Ladakh, or possibly even in Sikkim. But the place
of the find is not nearly so significant as the fact
that a good portion of his text is parallel to sixty of
those precious verses published in Paris thirty-one
years earlier by another Nicholas and fellow Russian
by the name of Notovitch.

Following are the entries about Jesus from
Himalaya and Altai-Himalaya, including the leg-
ends, ancient texts, and Roerich's own reflections.
They are reproduced here, just as they appear in


296 ROERICH CHAPTER FOUR

his original commentary on religion dated lacon-
ically, Mountains 1925.*

"If behind the present image of Buddha it is
difficult sometimes to recognize the lofty image of
Buddha the Teacher, then it is still more unex-
pected to find in Tibetan mountains beautiful lines
about Christ. Yet, a Buddhist monastery preserves
the teachings of Christ and Lamas pay reverence to
Christ, who passed and taught here."

"Lamas know that Christ, passing through
India and Tibet, turned not to the Brahmins and
the Kshatriyas, but to the Sudras—to the working
and humbled ones. The writings of the lamas recall
how Christ extolled woman—the Mother of the
World. And lamas point out how Christ regarded
the so-called miracles."'”

"There have been distinct glimpses about a
second visit of Christ to Egypt. But why is it
incredible that after that, he could have been in
India? Whoever doubts too completely that such
legends about the Christ life exist in Asia, probably
does not realize what an immense influence the
Nestorians have had in all parts of Asia and how
many so-called Apocryphal legends they spread in
the most ancient times. And then, how much truth
is veiled in the so-called Apocryphal legends!

+The chapter and verse cross-references to The Life of Saint Issa are noted in
the margin.


LEGENDS OF THE EAST 3 01

"Many remember the lines from the book of
Notovitch, but it is still more wonderful to discover,
on this site, in several variants, the same version of
the legend of Issa. The local people know nothing
of any published book but they know the legend and
with deep reverence they speak of Issa. One might
wonder what relation Moslems, Hindus or Bud-
dhists have with Issa. But it is still more significant
to see how vital are great ideas and how they
penetrate even the most remote places. Never may
one discover the source of such legends. But even if
they originated from ancient Nestorian Apocry-
pha,* at present it is instructive to see the wide-
spread and deep consideration paid to the subject. It
is significant to hear a local inhabitant, a Hindu,
relate how Issa preached beside a small pool near
the bazaar under a great tree, which now no longer
exists. In such purely physical indications you may
see how seriously this subject is regarded."*

"The writings of the lamas say that Christ was
not killed by the Jews but by the representatives of
the government. The empire and the wealthy killed
the Great Teacher who carried light to the working
and poor ones. The path of attainment of light!""

*In Trails to Inmost Asia (pp. 28-29), George Roerich says, "It seems very
probable that there existed a floating Nestorian Christian population in Ladak
during the eighth to tenth centuries A.D. when Nestorian colonies were
numerous along the trade routes of Turkestan and other regions of central Asia.
Whether the Nestorian visitors to Ladak were merchants or pilgrims, it is impos-
sible to determine at present. In the country round Ladak and Kashmir are
found curious legends of a Christian character, which are at present current
among the Mohammedan population of the two provinces."


298 ROERICH CHAPTER FOUR

"Let us hearken to the way in which, in the
mountains of Tibet, they speak of Christ. In the
documents which have the antiquity of about 1500
years one may read:

1V:12.13 Issa secretly left his parents and to-
gether with the merchants of Jerusalem
turned towards Ind to become perfected in
the Divine Word. And for the study of the
laws of the Great Buddha.

V5 He passed his time in Djagernath, in
Rajagriha, in Benares. All loved him be-
cause Issa dwelt in peace with Vicias and
Sudras, whom he instructed.

V68 But the Brahmins and Kshatriyas told
him that Brahma forbade those to approach
who were created out of his womb and feet.
The Vicias were allowed to listen to the
Vedas only on holidays and the Sudras were
not only forbidden to be present at the
reading of the Vedas but could not even
look at them. Sudras were destined to serve
eternally as slaves to the Brahmins and
Kshatriyas.

V: 10-1 But Issa listened not to the speeches of

20-23 the Brahmins, but went among the Sudras
to preach against the Brahmins and
Kshatriyas. He denied with his full foijce the
right of man to take upon himself the power
to deny his fellows of human dignity. Issa
preached that man had filled the temples


LEGENDS OF THE EAST 3 01

with his abominations. In order to revere
metals and stones, man sacrificed his fel-
lows in whom dwells a spark of the Supreme
Spirit. Man demeans those who labor in the
sweat of their brow, in order to gain the good
will of those sluggards who sit at the lavishly
set board. But they who deprive their
brothers of the common blessings shall be
themselves stripped of them. And Brahmins
and Kshatriyas shall become the Sudras of
Sudras, with whom the Supreme Spirit shall
abide unto eternity.

Vicias and Sudras were struck with
astonishment and asked what they could
perform. Issa bade them "Worship not the
idols. Do not consider yourself first. Do not
humiliate your neighbor. Help the poor.
Sustain the feeble. Do evil to no one. Do
not covet that which you do not possess, but
which is possessed by others."

The Brahmins and warriors, learning
of the words which had been told to the
Sudras, decided to kill Issa. But Issa, fore-
warned by the Sudras, departed from this
place by night.

Afterwards, when he had learned the
scrolls, Issa went into Nepal and into the
Himalaya mountains.

"Well, perform for us a miracle," de-
manded the priests of him. Then Issa re-
plied to them: "Miracles made their

25-27

vu-2

VIM, 5,9


300 ROERICH CHAPTER FOUR

appearance from the very day when the
world was created. He who cannot behold
them is deprived of the greatest gift of
life. —But woe to you, enemies of men, woe
unto you, if you await that He should attest
his power by miracle."

VINB Issa taught that men should not strive
to behold the Eternal Spirit with one's own
eyes but to feel Him with the heart, and to
become a pure and worthy soul.

VIM416 "Not only shall you not perform hu-
man offerings, but you must not slaughter
animals, because all is given for the use of
man. Do not steal the goods of others,
because that would be usurpation from your
near one. Do not cheat, that you may in
turn not be wronged.

vni:9 "Do not worship the sun—it is but a
part of the universe.

VHUB "As long as the nations were without
priests, they were ruled by the natural laws
and preserved the purity of their soul.

vni:20-21 "And I say: Beware, ye, who divert men
from the true path and who fill the people
with superstitions and prejudices, who blind
the vision of the seeing ones, and who
preach subservience to material things."

Ix Issa had reached his twenty-ninth year
when he arrived in the land of Israel.
1X5,7-9 Issa preached, "Do not be subject to

despair, do not desert your homes, do not


THE LOST YEARS OF JESUS 2 3

the Sind, a region in present-day southeast Paki-
stan in the lower Indus River valley, and estab-
lished himself among the "Aryas"—no doubt a
reference to the Aryans who migrated into the
Indus valley beginning in the second millennium
B.C. His fame spread and he was asked by the Jains
to stay with them. Instead, he went to Juggernaut
where he was joyously received by the Brahmin
priests who taught him to read and understand the
Vedas and to teach, heal, and perform exorcisms.

Issa spent six years studying and teaching at
Juggernaut, Rajagriha, Benares, and other holy
cities. He became embroiled in a conflict with the
Brahmins and the Kshatriyas (the priestly and
warrior castes) by teaching the holy scriptures to
the lower castes—the Vaisyas (farmers and mer-
chants) and the Sudras (the peasants and laborers).
The Brahmins said that the Vaisyas were autho-
rized to hear the Vedas read only during festivals
and the Sudras not at all. They were not even
allowed to look at them.

Rather than abide by their injunction, Issa
preached against the Brahmins and Kshatriyas to
the Vaisyas and Sudras. Aware of his denunciations,
the priests and warriors plotted to put Issa to death.

Warned by the Sudras, Issa left Juggernaut by
night and went to the foothills of the Himalayas in
southern Nepal, birthplace five centuries earlier of
the great Buddha Sakyamuni (a title of Gautama),
born prince of the Sakya clan—literally, the sage
(muni) of the Sakya tribe.


LEGENDS OF THE EAST

defile the nobility of your feelings, do not
worship idols but be imbued with hope and
with patience. Raise up the fallen and sus-
tain the hungry, succor the ailing, in order
that you be entirely pure and just upon that
last day which I am preparing for you.

"If you would perform deeds of be-
nevolence and love, perform them with a
generous heart. And let there not be in thy
deeds the hope of gain or any calculations of
profit. For deeds of gain or of profit will not
bring you nearer."

Then Pilate, ruler of Jerusalem, gave
orders to lay hands upon the preacher Issa and
to deliver him to the judges without, how-
ever, arousing the displeasure of the people.

But Issa taught: "Do not seek straight
paths in darkness and possessed by fear. But
gather force and support each other. He who
supports his neighbor strengthens himself.

"Do you not see that the rich and the
powerful ones are sowing the spirit of revolt
against the eternal consciousness of heaven?

"Lo, I tried to revive the laws of Moses
in the hearts of the people. And I say that
you do not understand their true meaning
because they do not teach revenge but for-
giveness. But the meaning of these laws is
distorted.”

But the ruler, waxing wroth, sent to
Issa his disguised servants that they should

301

1x16-17

X 8,9

x i4

xi4


302

XIM

xii:2

xii8,

ROERICH CHAPTER FOUR

watch his actions and report to him about
his words to the people.

"Thou just man," said the disguised ser-
vant of the ruler of Jerusalem approaching
Issa, "teach us, should we fulfill the will of
Caesar or await the approaching deliverance?"

But Issa, recognizing the disguised ser-
vants, said, "I have not said unto you that
you would be delivered from Caesar; but
I said that the soul which was immersed in
sin would be delivered from sin."

At this time, an old woman approached
the crowd, but was pushed back by one ofthe
disguised ones. Then Issa said, "Reverence
woman, mother of the universe. In her lies
the truth of creation. She is the foundation
of all that is good and beautiful. She is the
source of life and death. Upon her lies the
life of man, because she is the succor of his
labors. She gives birth to you in travail, she
watches over your growth. Until her very
death you bring anguish to her. Bless her.
Honor her. She is your only friend and
sustenance upon earth. Reverence her. De-
fend her. Love your wives and honor them,
because tomorrow they shall be mothers,
and later—the mothers of the human race.
Their love ennobles man, soothes the embit-
tered heart and tames the beast. Wife and
mother—invaluable treasure. They are the


LEGENDS OF THE EAST 3 01

adornments of the universe. From them
issues all which peoples the universe.

"As light divides itself from darkness, so
does womankind possess the gift to divide in
man good intent from the thought of evil.
Your noblest thoughts shall belong to woman.
Gather from them thy moral strength, which
you must possess to sustain your near ones.
Do not humiliate her, for therein you will
humiliate yourselves. And through this shall
you lose the feeling of love without which
naught exists upon earth. Bring reverence to
thy wife and she shall defend you. And all
which you will do to mother, to wife, to
widow or to another woman in sorrow—that
shall you also do for the Spirit.”

So taught Issa, but the ruler Pilate,
frightened by the devotion of the people to
Issa, who, if his enemies may be believed,
wanted to cause the uprising of the people,
ordered one of his spies to make accusation
against him.

Issa, who taught only of the salvation
of his fellowmen, endured all sufferings.
Said Issa: "Not far hence is the time when by
the Highest Will the people will become
purified, because then shall come the proc-
lamation of the deliverance of the peoples
and their union into one family.” [emphasis
Roerich's]

XIM7-21

XIIU

xni:5. is


304 ROERICH CHAPTER FOUR

X1N22 And then turning to the ruler he pro-
claimed: "Why to demean thy dignity and
teach thy subordinates to live in deceit, when
even without this, thou couldst have also had
the means of accusing an innocent one."4°

After quoting these manuscripts, Roerich
wrote in Altai-Himalaya:

"Thus the legends of Asia weave such an
image of Jesus, so ennobled and near to all nations.
And Asia preserves in its mountains such legends.
And it is not astonishing that the teachings of Jesus
and Buddha are leading all nations into one family.
But beautiful it is, that the light-giving idea of
unity is expressed so clearly. And who shall be
opposed to this idea? Who will lessen the simplest
and most beautiful decision of life? And the
earthly Unity is so easily and scientifically merging
into the great Unity of all worlds. The command-
ments of Jesus and of Buddha lie upon one shelf.
And the signs of ancient Sanskrit and of Pali unite
all aspirations."*!

The author continues in Himalaya:

"Another source—historically less estab-
lished—speaks also about the life of Jesus in Tibet:

Near Lhassa was a temple of teaching, witha
wealth of manuscripts. Jesus wanted to ac-
quaint himself with them. Ming-ste, a great
sage of all East, was in this temple. After
much time, with utmost dangers, Jesus with
a guide reached this temple in Tibet. And


LEGENDS OF THE EAST 3 01

Ming-ste and all teachers widely opened the
gates and welcomed the Jewish sage.

Often Ming-ste conversed with Jesus
about the future era and about the sacred
duty accepted by the people of this century.

Finally Jesus reached a mountain-pass
and in the chief city of Ladak, Leh, he was
joyously accepted by monks and people of
the lower class. And Jesus taught in the
monasteries and in the bazaars, wherever the
simple people gathered—there he preached.

Not far from this place lived a woman
whose son had died and she brought him to
Jesus. And in the presence of a multitude,
Jesus laid his hand on the child, and the
child rose healed. And many brought their
children and Jesus laid his hands upon
them, healing them.

Among the Ladakists, Jesus passed
many days, teaching them to heal and to
transform the earth into a heaven of bliss.
And they loved him and when the time of
his departure came they sorrowed as chil-
dren. And at morning came a multitude to
bid him farewell.

Jesus said to them, "I came to show
human possibilities. What has been created
by me, all men can create. And that which
I am, all men will be. These gifts belong to
all nations and all lands—for this is the
bread and the water of life."


306 ROERICH CHAPTER FOUR

Said Jesus of skilled singers: "Whence is
their talent and their power? For in one short
life they could not possibly accumulate a
quality of voice and the knowledge of har-
mony and of tone. Are these miracles? No,
because all things take place as a result of
natural laws. Many thousands of years ago
these people already molded their harmonies
and their qualities. And they come again to
learn still more from varied manifestations."

Picking up the thread in Altai-Himalaya,
we read:

"After the vital conception of general well-
being indicated by Jesus and preserved by Budhists,
one cannot but recall the words of Eusebius in his
book, ‘Life of Constantine’: 'In order to attach to
Christianity greater attraction in the eyes of the
nobility, the priests adopted the outer garments and
adornments which were used in pagan cults.' Every
one who knows the cult of Mithra can appreciate
the justice of this remark. A devout neo-Platonist
and worshiper of the ancient philosophy, Clement
of Alexandria, taught Christian bishops."

"Ignorance! Russian princes perished in the
tents of Khans for their refusal to reverence the
image of Buddha—yet at the same time the monas-
teries of Tibet were already preserving the wonder-
ful lines about Jesus. Cyril of Alexandria brought


LEGENDS OF THE EAST 3 01

about the destruction of the woman ascetic
Hypatia, but it was to her own pupil, Cinesius,
that the bishopric of Ptolemy was offered even
before he accepted baptism.

"Superstition! Jerome advised the newly con-
verted Christians to trample upon the body of their
pagan mother.

"Cynicism! Pope Leo X exclaimed, 'How use-
ful to us is this allegory of Christ!"

"It should not be forgotten that Origen, who
knew the meaning of the ancient mysteries and
understood the true significance of the teaching of
Jesus, even he could speak in the words of 'The
Acts': 'And all the believers were together and held
everything in united possession. And the estates
which were sold and all properties were distributed
to each according to his need. And each day,
dwelling unitedly and breaking bread in their
homes, they partook of their food with joy and
simplicity of the heart.’

"Origen understood why this general well-
being was important and saw profoundly into the
truth. Because of this, the Church, sometimes
extremely liberal in bestowing the title of saint,
refused him this title; but even enemies did not
refuse to call Origen a teacher. For he approached
the teaching scientifically and did not fear to speak
of what was evident to him.

"Of what was Origen accused? 'Lives of the
Saints' thus speaks of him: 'Origen, the wonder of


308 ROERICH CHAPTER FOUR

his age by reason of the prodigiousness of his mind
and the profundity of his erudition, was con-
demned for heresy in two Alexandrian Councils
and, after his death, in the Council of Constanti-
nople. Origen did not think correctly about many
truths of the Christian Church. Expounding the
non-gentile teachings of the preexistence of the
soul, he did not reflect properly upon Christ,
believing that a certain number of spiritual beings
of equal worth were created, of whom one strove
with such flaming love that he became united with
the Highest Word and became its bearer upon
earth. Holding to the heretical belief in the incar-
nation of the God-Word and the creation of the
world, Origen did not rightly comprehend the
death of Christ by crucifixion, representing it as
something which had its spiritual counterpart in a
spiritual world. He attributed too much to the acts of
natural forces with which our nature is gifted ....' —
Admirable were the councils which could speak
against the infinite cosmic meaning of matter!"

"Amid strife and in the manifestation of truth,
upon the chariots of time ascend the law-givers of
human welfare: Moses, the untiring leader; Amos,
the austere; Buddha, lion-conqueror; Confucius,
justice of life; Zoroaster, flaming poet of the sun;
Plato, transfigured and reflected in his 'Shadows'’;
Blessed Issa, great in the immortal sacrifice; solitary
Origen, the wise commentator; Sergius, great
teacher and ascetic. All walked untiringly; all fell


LEGENDS OF THE EAST 3 01

victim to the persecution of their day; all knew that
the teachings of general well-being would inevita-
bly come to pass; all knew that each sacrifice for the
sake of the general well-being was but the approach
of the way."

"On the mountain they tell of these teachings
and listen to them simply. And in the deserts and
upon the steppes people sing in their daily life
about eternity and about the same general well-
being. The Tibetans, the Mongols, the Buriats, all
remember about this happiness."




. Your Jesus was here.”

THE GOSPELS record Jesus age twelve in the
temple. Then about age thirty at the river Jordan.
That leaves approximately seventeen years un-
accounted for.

During those so-called lost years, the child
"increased in wisdom and stature," as Luke wrote.
But was it in the carpenter shop at Nazareth?

According to ancient Tibetan manuscripts,
Jesus secretly withdrew from the home of Mary
and Joseph at age thirteen. Young "Issa" joined
a merchant caravan. Destination: India and the
Himalayas.

At Juggernaut, "the white priests of Brahma
made him ajoyous welcome. They taught him to
read and understand the Vedas, to cure by aid of
prayer, to teach, to explain the holy scriptures
to the people, and to drive out evil spirits from
the bodies of men."

¢ Buddhist scholars documented
"The Life of Saint Issa" two thousand
years ago.

* Nicolas Notovitch discovered the long-
lost document in 1887 at the Himis
monastery in Ladakh.

¢ Swami Abhedananda published a Bengali
translation of the Himis manuscript
in 1929.


J 20 ELIZABETH CLARE PROPHET CHAPTER ONE

After six years of study, Issa "had become a
perfect expositor of the sacred writings." He then
left the Himalayas and journeyed west, preaching
against idolatry along the way, finally returning to
Palestine at the age of twenty-nine.

The Life of Saint Issa can be divided into
three sections. The first part, chapter 1 through the
middle of chapter 4, deals with the conditions that
led to his incarnation, his birth and very early life.
The second part, the remainder of chapter 4
through chapter 8, details the lost years—ages
thirteen to twenty-nine, when Issa was studying in
India and the Himalayas. And the final part, chap-
ters 9 through 14, covers the unfoldment of events
during his mission in Palestine.

The account of what took place after Issa
returned to Palestine, while similar to that recorded
in the Gospels, has major differences. John the
Baptist does not appear in The Life of Saint Issa.
The resurrection is omitted, if not completely
denied. And, in a perplexing reversal (or perhaps an
alteration of the story as it was transmitted orally
across the miles, translated, and copied), Pilate—
who is clearly the antagonist—tries through a se-
ries of intrigues to trap Issa and finally condemns
him, while the Jewish priests and elders find no
fault in him.

Pilate fears Issa's popularity and the possibility
that he might be chosen king. After Issa has
preached for three years, Pilate orders a spy to accuse


ChapterFive

"These books Say
yourJesus Was here!"

Elisabeth Caspar is testimony
on the texts at Himis


DR. ELISABETH CASPARI


The Parchment in Hand

Ma: of the world's great scientific and his-
torical breakthroughs have been made by

people searching for something entirely different.
Columbus was looking for the Indies when he found
the Bahamas, Roentgen was experimenting with
cathode rays when he discovered the X ray, and
Fleming was studying bacteria when he stumbled
upon penicillin.

One seldom knows what lies around the bend
or over the next pass. The necessary ingredients
seem to be only the inquiring mind, perseverance,
the daring to follow one's hunches—the intuitive
faculty of the heart—and ultimately to rely on the
promise "Seek and ye shall find," which in no way
guarantees what one shall find but only that some-
thing will be forthcoming as a reward for noble
effort—if one is faithful to the end.

Take the case of Elisabeth Getaz. Her plans
did not include taking the high road to Ladakh and
rediscovering the manuscripts purportedly found
by Nicolas Notovitch, Swami Abhedananda, and
possibly Nicholas Roerich. For one thing, a bone


3. 46 CASPARI CHAPTER FIVE

disease in her foot left her unable to walk during
much of her childhood. Her immediate goals lay
more in getting up out of bed than in traveling up
and down steep mountain passes to a remote Bud-
dhist monastery in the Himalayas. But then, pre-
science of our fate might prove overwhelming; one
step at a time our lives unfold. And for Elisabeth,
the first step was just that—taking a step.

Things did not look promising. A string of
surgeons tried unsuccessfully to operate on her
foot and her minister concluded that it was not the
will of God for her to regain her health and run
and play like other children. But, against all odds,
she would not give up.

Her family finally located a physician who
thought he could help her. His treatment was
novel. Under the circumstances, it was the only
thing that even offered a glimmer of hope—in
more than one way. He prescribed sun treatments,
and they worked! Within four years she could walk.

On the road to recovery, Elisabeth began to
study the piano. It was an instrument she could
play with her foot propped up. She fell in love with
it and became an excellent pianist; her services as a
piano tutor began to be in great demand around
her native village of Chateau d'Oex, Switzerland.

Not unexpectedly, Mile. Gf£taz decided that
her vocation was to teach music to children. She
studied hard and received a Diplome de Perfec-
tionnement from the Institut de Ribaupierre at
Montreux, Switzerland. Then she went on to the


"THESE BOOKS SAY YOI/R JESUS WAS HEREI" 343

ficole Normale de Musique de Lausanne and there
received two advanced degrees in music pedagogy.
Upon graduation, she founded a music school in
Chateau d'Oex and developed a unique teaching
method which took the drudgery out of practice
and made her school an immediate success. From
all over Europe both beginning piano students and
aspiring music teachers flocked to her Alpine school.

In 1929, M. Charles Caspari came to Cha-
teau d'Oex to be restored by the fresh mountain air
and sunshine. Not only did he regain his health,
but he met and courted Mile. G6taz. After their
marriage he took over many of the administrative
details of the school, leaving Madame more time
for the calling she loved—music. They worked
together at Chateau d'Oex for eight years.

But the finger of destiny was not content to
leave Madame Caspari in the Alps. In the spring of
1937, a chance remark set in motion a chain of
events that was to lead her all over India and finally
to the rooftop of Himis monastery in the Hima-
layas. "There is a great teacher coming to France to
give lectures on science and religion," a friend said
to her one day. "You really ought to go.”

"Why not?" the Casparis thought. So they
crossed Lake Geneva to Evian where the lecture
was being held. It was sponsored by the Swiss
members of Mazdaznan,* the Western Zoroastrian
movement. Madame Caspari was taken with the

*Mazdaznan: in Avestan (ancient Iranian language), divine thought or knowl-
edge of Cod in man. Mazda ‘wisdom’, also Cod or Light; znan 'worshipful' or
‘to be worshiped'


3. 46 CASPARI CHAPTER — FIVE

teaching and joined the organization soon after. At
the lecture she met the leaders of Mazdaznan.
When they discovered she was soon going to Lon-
don, they made a seemingly unportentous request.
"Would you be so kind, Madame, to convey our
greetings to our beloved Mother Superior?” Hap-
pily she agreed.

The rendezvous was more than she expected.
Riding in a cab through the streets of London to
the address given, she imagined that the head of
the movement would be a prim English matron.
Much to her surprise, the driver pulled up to a
building as impressive as Buckingham Palace.
Madame Caspari was ushered into a Louis XIV
salon where she found herself standing before an
imposing lady—who turned out to be an American
called Mother Gloria by Mazdaznan followers—
the regal Mrs. Clarence Gasque.

In the ensuing conversation, Madame Caspari
learned that Mrs. Gasque was also the head of the
World Fellowship of Faith, formed for the unity and
cooperation of those engaged in the spiritual
search. Mrs. Gasque, delighted to discover that
Madame Caspari was a musician, explained that
she was planning a lecture tour of the cities of
northern England. In her direct and charming
manner she said, "I need a pianist. You must come
with me."

"But I have a husband and a school of music,"
Madame Caspari replied. "I cannot just fly away
like this, I have to go home."


"THESE BOOKS SAY YOI/R JESUS WAS HEREI” 343

Mrs. Gasque handed her the telephone. "Talk
to Monsieur."

Charles told her to follow her heart, and so she
accepted the invitation. Thus began a long friend-
ship between Mme. Caspari and Mrs. Gasque.

At the end of the lecture tour, Madame Cas-
pari returned to her music school. But not for long.

One Monday morning in December 1937,
she received a letter from Mrs. Gasque saying she
was planning a trip to Tibet with stops in Ceylon,
India, and Kashmir. In the course of her journey,
she proposed a study of Buddhism and a pilgrim-
age to Mount Kailas, a sacred Tibetan mountain.
She closed with, "You and Monsieur are coming
with me..."

The offer was too tempting. The Casparis,
also interested in the religions of the East, knew by
this time that a request from their dear friend was
not to be denied. They had only three short weeks
to tie up their affairs, pack, and set sail on the
steamer Orontes for Ceylon.

In every country Mrs. Gasque and her party
of nine were received with utmost respect and even
ceremony by religious leaders. One morning their
train arrived in Madras at 6:00 a.m. Madame
Caspari woke up and peeked out the window. The
Maharajah of Pithapuram, head of India's World
Fellowship of Faith, was in attendance with his
retinue—complete with red carpet. He insisted
that Mother Gloria and Madame Caspari stay at
his Palace of the Roses.


3 46 CASPARI CHAPTER FIVE

Here the travelers sojourned in an elegant guest-
house surrounded by the fabled splendor of the East.
This same sort of elaborate hospitality became par
for the course throughout much of their journey.

After passing through Madras, Bombay, and
New Delhi, they headed north to Kashmir. In the
spring of 1938, Mrs. Gasque rented a bungalow in
Srinagar, the capital of Kashmir, where they could
prepare their gear for the Tibetan path. They spent
the better part of a year there. Everything had to
be thought of—food, equipment, and servants, not
to mention medicine, batteries, and cream to pro-
tect them from the elements. The Himalayas were
not to be tackled lightly.

They started out on a spring day in 1939. First
they traveled by bus as far as it could go. Beyond
that point, no wheels but prayer wheels could
venture into the fortress of the Himalayas.* They
added to their caravan twelve servants, one transla-
tor, and 112 ponies plus guides and pony wallahs,
or drivers.

Their aims were extensive but not unheard of.
They planned to stop at several monasteries on the
way to Mount Kailas to observe the practices of
Buddhism, the customs and daily life of the people
for whom this teaching was the moving force. They
also had high hopes of getting to Himis in time for
the famed "devil dance" renowned for its beautiful
costumes of rich brocade. Little did they know that

*When the Chinese Communists invaded Ladakh in 1962, the Indian govern-
ment hurriedly completed a 270-mile (4}4-kilometet) road from Srinagar to Leh
to repel them. Jeeps, tourist buses, and trucks now make the journey in two days.


7

The beauty of the Himalayas is characterized by its contrasts.
M. et Mme. Charles Caspari captured this juxtaposition of green
trees against icy peaks in their 1939 pilgrimage to Mount Kailas,
Tibet. The onset of World War II cut short the journey, however,
forcing them to turn back, but not before visiting the great
monastery of Himis.


At the beginning of the sojourn at Himis, a welcoming committee
escorted the visitors to their guesthouse.

af

Shortly before the pilgrims departed, the librarian,
carrying ancient manuscripts, approached Mrs.
Gasque and Madame Caspari as they were seated on
the roof: “These books say your Jesus was here.”


THE LOST YEARS OF JESUS 2 3

him. Issa is arrested and Roman soldiers torture him
in a vain effort to extract a treasonable confession.

Hearing of his sufferings, the chief priests and
elders implore Pilate to release Issa on the occasion
of a great feast. When Pilate flatly rejects their
plea, they ask him to let Issa appear before the
tribunal of the elders so that he can be acquitted or
condemned prior to the feast. Pilate consents.

Issa is tried with two thieves. During the trial,
Pilate interrogates Issa and produces false witnesses
against him. Issa forgives the witnesses and rebukes
Pilate who, becoming enraged, acquits the two
thieves and condemns Issa to death. The judges tell
Pilate, "We will not take upon our heads the great
sin of condemning an innocent man and acquit-
ting thieves," and proceed to wash their hands in a
sacred vessel saying, "We are innocent of the death
of this just man."

Pilate then orders Issa and the two thieves to
be nailed to crosses. At sunset, Issa loses con-
sciousness and his soul leaves his body "to become
absorbed in the Divinity.”

Wary of the people, Pilate gives Issa's body to
his parents, who bury it near the place of execution.
Crowds come to pray at Issa's tomb. Three days
later, Pilate, fearing an insurrection, sends his
soldiers to remove Issa's body and bury it elsewhere.

The following day, the people find Issa's tomb
open and empty, which causes the immediate
spread ofa rumor "that the supreme Judge had sent


"THESE BOOKS SAY YOI/R JESUS WAS HEREI” 343

they would return enriched beyond all expectations
with an experience very different from the tradi-
tional pilgrims’ path. After spending their first
night under the stars, they awoke at dawn and were
early in the saddle—riding hard to make camp.

Due to the skill of their servants—the very best
to be found in Kashmir—and foresight in packing,
the journey was less arduous than it had been for
Nicolas Notovitch nearly fifty-two years before.
While they got acquainted with their mounts, the
servants galloped ahead to prepare the first camp at
the meadow of Sonamarg. In what became their
daily routine, they set up the tents and began
cooking a hot meal for the hungry travelers. Wiz-
ards at mountain cookery, in no time they had built
makeshift ovens and baked fresh bread. And so the
pilgrims settled into this comfortable ritual.

Traveling ever upward towards the first high
pass, the Zoji La soaring to 11,580 feet, they found
upon arrival that snow covered the ground al-
though it was July. Their guides made them travel
single file in complete silence. "Do not speak,"
they said, "you will bring down an avalanche."

As they descended, the snow ended as suddenly
as it had begun and they were assailed by the sweet
smell of wild-rose hedges. Down treacherous de-
files, along the edges of gorges, across scorching
deserts which became freezing at sundown as the
winds swept off the glaciers, braving chasms
spanned by bridges impossibly narrow—the travel-
ers pushed on.


3 46 CASPARI CHAPTER — FIVE

Despite the large caravan, it was not uncom-
mon for wild beasts to prowl close to the tents of
Mrs. Gasque and the Casparis. On some welcome
nights, the two ladies stayed in dak bungalows built
for official use.

Traveling towards Leh, they encountered in-
habitants of this seemingly inhospitable land. The
friendly, open, and ingenuous Ladakhis were al-
ways ready with a big smile, a cry of “joolay,
joolay” (hello, hello"), and a big welcome for
Mrs. Gasque.

Greeted by the head lama or chief villager at
every stopping point, they would be served, with
great ceremony, Tibetan tea. The souplike bever-
age was flavored with rancid yak butter—the more
important the guest, the more rancid the butter.
Hence, the most rancid lump was always saved for
Mrs. Gasque!

Slowly traversing the ancient caravan route,
they visited Mulbekh, Lamayuru, and other mon-
asteries. Most striking was the constant contrast
characterizing the countryside. Freezing winds that
changed to gentle breezes in a few hundred feet.
Smiling lamas living in enchanted palaces juxta-
posed against wasteland. Seemingly endless high
plateaus, barren in every direction, interrupted by
rich green oases surrounded by groves of trees.

Moving midst the all-pervading spirit of the
Buddha, they talked to monks and toured monas-
teries. The faces of the lamas, many of them young,


"THESE BOOKS SAY YOI/R JESUS WAS HEREI” 343

expressed a childlike curiosity and a joviality. It
seemed to the pilgrims that while traditions had
survived, much of the real wisdom was buried
away in aging manuscripts. The parchments and
tankas (tapestries depicting the lives of saints and
Buddhas), sculptures and statues they saw along
the way were carefully preserved, though in some
monasteries the once-vibrant frescoes were fading
with the years.

Although the people revered Gautama Bud-
dha, it seemed as if their religion, now but a ritual,
was transmitted to them more through majestic
mountains, even their collective unconscious mem-
ory, than through ancient texts. But the traditions
were scrupulously followed. Prayer flags flapped
from nearly every available point. Prayer wheels-
cylinders either containing or inscribed with
prayers—could be found embedded in walls, espe-
cially in monasteries, in the hands of pilgrims, or
fitted with paddles and set in streams to keep a
never-ending vigil.

They believed that the spin of a wheel or the
flutter of a flag was equivalent to uttering the
inscribed prayer. Perhaps it was their solution to
the injunction "Pray without ceasing!"

These myriad impressions, like many hands
sketching scenes on a mural, combined to make up
Madame Caspari's story of Ladakh. As the first and
what was destined to be the only leg of their Tibetan
journey was drawing to its close, the caravan


3 46 CASPARI CHAPTER FIVE

reached Nimu, a village Just before Leh. Here they
paused to wash their clothes—and ponies—in the
river. Camping in the warm sun beside the Indus,
they had a chance to contemplate the ice-covered
peaks—glaciers shining in the sun, gentle river at
their feet.

The next day they reached Leh, which at
11,500 feet is one of the highest cities in the
world.* At the entrance of the city, they en-
countered a chorten* standing as a silent sentinel.
A quarter-mile wall studded with stones carved
with a token of centuries’ devotion—OM MANI
PADME HUM*—bade them welcome.

The narrow streets were characteristic of a
town that had never known a car. Its crowded
bazaars were a meeting place for Chinese, Indians,
Kashmiris, Arabs, and Tibetans. The king's palace
where Roerich had stayed presided over all. They
visited the ancient monastery and soon pressed on
for Himis and the pageant.

Leaving the city, they started out across the
great desert plateau separating Leh and Himis. All
of a long hot day they traversed this "desert of the
pink stones," as their fellow traveler Cyrano called
it. As dusk fell, then night, they still had not
reached Himis. Then suddenly they were in a cool,
fragrant oasis right at the foot of a steep gorge.
High above, the invisible monastery clung to the

face of the rock.

*Wenchuan in China is the highest at 16,732 feet,

*shrine or tomb of a saint or holy man

*Buddhist mantra: Hail to the lewel in the Lotus (the sacred lire pulsating within
the chakra)


"THESE BOOKS SAY YOI/R JESUS WAS HEREI” 343

They received their usual reception the next
morning when the welcoming party arrived. The
abbot himself and two chief assistants came down
to provide Mrs. Gasque escort up to Himis.

The monks had prepared a beautiful guest-
house for Mrs. Gasque and Madame Caspari. The
rest of the group camped in tents near a little
stream. But, alas, the pilgrims found that because
of the difficulties and delays of their journey, they
had just missed the sacred festival.

As luck would have it, before they had a
chance to be disappointed, the abbot told them
that the paraphernalia hadn't been packed away yet
and offered to give Mrs. Gasque a command per-
formance of the entire three-day pageant!

The next day it began with a panoply of
brilliant costumes and animated lama-actors. A
dramatic portrayal of Armageddon unfolded before
them. The power of Good was personified as
Buddha in the form of a lion, symbolizing the
strength and courage needed to drive the Evil One
out of the world. He was beset by demons, skele-
tons, and animals in grotesque masks played with
great glee by the junior lamas. All whirled and
gyrated to the braying of the Eastern orchestra—
ten-foot trumpets, cymbals, and drums of every
size—increasing in volume to the final climax, the
casting out of the evil spirits and the triumph of the
Buddha.

After the festival, they lingered at the lama-
sery for four days touring the temple and the


3. 46 CASPARI CHAPTER FIVE

library,* chatting with the monks and enjoying the
view from Himis' high rooftop.

On the third day Mrs. Gasque and Madame
Caspari were sitting on the roof, watching a travel-
ing tanka painter. Nearby, the monks' letter writer,
cross-legged before a small table, was painting
beautiful Tibetan script with delicate brushes.

In the midst of this scene, the librarian and
two other monks approached the ladies carrying
three objects. Madame Caspari recognized them
as Buddhist books made of sheets of parchment
sandwiched between two pieces of wood and
wrapped in brocades—green and red and blue
seeded with gold.

With great reverence, the librarian unwrapped
one of the books and presented the parchments to
Mrs. Gasque:

"These books say your Jesus was here!"

One sentence.

Madame Caspari looked at them in awe. In a
few suspended seconds the last verse of the book of
John swept through her mind like an endless river.
As a child in Sunday school in Chateau d'Oex she
had listened in wonderment: "And there are also
many other things which Jesus did, the which, if

‘When asked about the difference between her account of Himis and that of
Roerich (Madame Caspari recalls the Himis library as clean, well-kept, and
small, while Roerich says the manuscripts were stored in "dusty corners"),
Madame Caspari answered that Himis was probably cleaned up quite a bit at
festival time when she was there. Furthermore, there was a fourteen-year differ-
ence between their visits. Another explanation for this discrepancy may be found
in an account by Marco Pallis, a Creek who visited Himis in 1936. He noted that
Himis had two "libraries": a small one with a well cared-for collection of manu-
scripts, and a larger, less-organized room where piles of books were stored in
disarray (Peaks and Lamas [London: Cassell and Co., 1942J, p. 304). It is also
possible that a new, more careful librarian had taken over since Roerich's visit.



"THESE BOOKS SAY YOI/R JESUS WAS HEREI” 343

they should be written every one, I suppose that
even the world itself could not contain the books
that should be written."

Did the apostle of Christ's love know that his
Jesus had been here? Did the Master recount his
fateful journey to his beloved disciple—with whom
he had also shared the mysteries of the kingdom? If
so, had someone deliberately suppressed this his-
torical information which would be so meaning-
ful, so precious to Christians? Wouldn't Jesus want
us to know how he spent the most important
seventeen years of his life—the preparation for his
universal and triumphant message?

"Your Jesus was here.”

It was incomprehensible that such an earth-
shaking event should have been kept secret from all
of Christendom for all these centuries. Why didn't
the whole world know about Jesus’ journey to
Ladakh?

She and Mother Gloria looked at one another,
exulting in their joy and amazement. Together they
examined the manuscripts more closely, covered as
they were with elegant Tibetan script.

Searching her memory, Mme. Caspari re-
called hearing a legend that Jesus had been in India
and Alexandria, but never in her wildest imaginings
had it occurred to her that "her Jesus" had come so
far, so high—here to the Himalayas. At that mo-
ment she was completely unaware of the fifty-year-
old Nicolas Notovitch controversy, nor could she
guess the import of her eyewitness account to the
ongoing debate.


3 46 CASPARI CHAPTER FIVE

She observed that the librarian was speaking
out of a conviction born of the monastery's ancient
tradition. His words rang with the authority of an
exact knowledge handed down with the manu-
scripts from head lama to head lama. It was not
hearsay, no mere oral tradition, because the writ-
ings were in hand—and for a moment in her hand.
The evidence was there, kept intact by the unbro-
ken continuity of a religious order. Here was the
parchment. There was the script. Here was the
treasured record that Jesus had come on a mission
to India. And here were Buddhist monks who
revered "her Jesus" as one of the greatest spiritual
teachers of all time.

Mrs. Gasque looked at the unknown heralds
of the mystery of mysteries: Christ in Tibet two
thousand years ago! She, too, saw that they han-
dled the parchment with great devotion. It was
transparent that the lamas had no other motive for
revealing their secret to the two ladies except love
and a sense of kinship with souls who had ventured
so far from home to study the path of their Bud-
dha. The librarian, with the permission, no doubt,
of the abbot of Himis, derived profound pleasure
in bringing the good news that would cause only
rejoicing to those who recognized in the teachings
of Buddha statements of the Universal One who
spoke through Issa, great messenger of Truth.

"My Jesus was here! In Himis!" Mme. Caspari
thought. Maybe he even sat on one of these very
rooftops—here or at Leh—or studied in one of the


"THESE BOOKS SAY YOI/R JESUS WAS HEREI" 343

ancient libraries. She pondered the implications of
the find. Her mind whirled, reeled as she thought of
Jesus traveling, perhaps, all over the world. She
realized that up until that hour, Jesus had been to
her, as to most Christians, a product of Palestine.
He was born there, he lived and died there. Any
religious training he received was a part of the
Jewish tradition. To place Jesus in Tibet or in India
would mean that he had studied their customs,
their languages, their religion!

Why did Jesus feel compelled to undertake
this journey, just as she had, prior to his Palestin-
ian mission? And to what manifold purposes did
our Father send him? Indeed, this casual encoun-
ter atop the world had far-reaching theological
implications. Maybe the teachings of Jesus told
to John substantiated in turn the teachings of
Gautama or the Vedas.

And we who also ponder these questions may
wonder, too, why Mother Gloria and Elisabeth
Caspari were selected by the monks. Many Euro-
peans had visited Himis, some skeptical, others
sincere, but only a handful—as far as our own
research has been able to discover—were told of the
documents. Why were Mrs. Gasque and Madame
Caspari put in the singular position of adding their
voices to the few known confirmations of the
existence of the Issa documents at Himis?

Perhaps the monks saw that these pilgrims
were different, that here were people devoted to the
study of their religion, reverent and accepting of


3 46 CASPARI CHAPTER FIVE

their heritage of spiritual knowledge, who did not
view Buddha as a heathen idol or a piece of
Oriental art. Evidently they knew that these two
devotees posed no threat and would not try to
confiscate the documents or walk off with "souve-
nirs" from their libraries. For whatever reason, on
that momentous occasion in the summer of 1939,
Mrs. Gasque and Madame Caspari joined the
small group of pilgrims who had been chosen by
Providence to testify regarding some of the best-
kept secrets of the life of Jesus Christ.

Each member of this select group journeyed
to Himis in a different state of mind, with varying
levels of expectation, and each uncovered the same
story: Nicolas Notovitch, who had heard rumors of
it and went in search of the documents. Swami
Abhedananda, who went to see for himself and to
verify Notovitch's story. Nicholas Roerich, who
had heard Issa legends recounted all over Ladakh
and expected to find corroboration in some form.
And finally Mrs. Clarence Gasque and Madame
Elisabeth Caspari, who were served the ancient
books on a silver platter without having so much as
lifted a finger of the mind, and most certainly
unaware of the legend or of the finds of Notovitch,
Abhedananda, and Roerich.

Madame Caspari descended the slope to the
plain with the rest of the party. Camping in the
oasis that night, she and Charles listened to his
short-wave radio. World War II had been declared.
They had to get back to Switzerland as soon as


J 22 ELIZABETH CLARE PROPHET CHAPTER ONE

his angels to carry away the mortal remains of the
saint in whom dwelt on earth a part of the Divine
Spirit." The text ends with the persecution of Issa's
followers, the disciples going forth to preach, and the
conversion of the pagans, their kings and warriors.

This story was allegedly written down three to
four years after the crucifixion based on accounts
brought to India by merchants who had witnessed
the event.'5

The Unknown Life of Jesus Christ was an
immediate success. At least eight editions were
published in France in 1894, and three separate
English translations appeared in the United States.
Another English translation was published in Lon-
don the following year. It was also translated into
German, Spanish, Swedish, and Italian.'”

The book was controversial to say the least.
On May 19, 1894, a reviewer for the New York
Times said that the particulars of Notovitch's story
were "not improbable."'® Having conceded that, he
asserted, "But if skeptics should believe that this
Tibetan or Indian relation of the life of Christ is
trustworthy, they would be very credulous."

The reviewer held that Notovitch's find was no
more important than "the assurances of theoso-
phists that Christ was well acquainted with
Buddhist theology" and warned that an English sci-
entific commission preparing to verify the authen-
ticity of the original documents "will have wasted its
time and its scientific knowledge," whether or not it
found them to be authentic.


"THESE BOOKS SAY YOI/R JESUS WAS HEREI” 343

possible. They decided not to go on to Mount
Kailas as planned.

Though they made haste down the trail, they
arrived in Srinagar too late to get a seat on the last
civilian transport. They were stuck. In India. For
nine long years! Wondering what was happening to
their home, their world.

Madame Caspari tucked her precious treasure
away in her memory, only volunteering it many
years later ata Summit University Forum interview
after having heard of the beautiful verses about Jesus
reportedly copied by Nicolas Notovitch from an-
cient Tibetan manuscripts at the monastery of Himis.

From Srinagar, the Casparis went to see a
friend in New Delhi. There Madame Caspari
decided to go back to Madras to attend the course of
famed educator Maria Montessori, whom she had
met in India prior to the start of the pilgrimage. It
was a good way to occupy one's time and creative
resources during the war. Dr. Montessori was de-
lighted with Madame Caspari’'s music methods.
"You were a Montessorian before you met me," she
declared. Madame Caspari stayed with her new-
found teacher and they became lifelong friends.

After the war, the Casparis went to the United
States, planning to stay only a short time. Then
Richert and Lowell Fillmore, sons of Unity foun-
der Charles Fillmore, became intrigued with Mon-
tessori's message. Richert encouraged Madame


3 46 CASPARI CHAPTER — FIVE

Caspari's efforts and in 1949 helped her to begin
her own Montessori school in Lee's Summit, Mis-
souri, named Wee Wisdom Garden. It was the first
Montessori school in the United States since Dr.
Montessori's departure in the early 1900s. Soon
Madame Caspari had three schools and over ninety
students. Working as a team, the Casparis devoted
the rest of their lives to the advancement of the
Montessori message in America, lecturing all over
the country.

Elisabeth Caspari has organized Montessori
schools in California, Missouri, Kansas, Florida,
South Carolina, and Mexico. Several hundred
Montessori preschools have been _ established
through the Pan-American Montessori Society
which she founded with Dr. Feland Meadows. In
the last five years, Madame Caspari, now eighty-
five, has completed training courses for teachers,
interested professionals, and parents in Denver,
Savannah, and Los Angeles. Active in spreading the
Montessori revolution in education, she has most
recently received invitations to teach her course in
India, Australia, the Philippines, Switzerland, and
Senegal.

Presently she assists in the direction of Montes-
sori International and trains Montessori teachers at
the beautiful Royal Teton Ranch located in Park
County, Montana. In this private school, preschool
through twelfth grade, students and teachers from
all over the world benefit from the miracles of the
Montessori method. Here, too, Madame Caspari


"THESE BOOKS SAY YOI/R JESUS WAS HEREI” = 343

has found the unity of the teachings of Christ and
Buddha which form the basis of community life—a
search which has taken her and many other students
of the unknown life of Christ around the world and
Home at last.




Chapter Six

ladakh today-
impressions of

a cultural
anthropologist

Dr. Robert S. Ravicz
traces the traditions of life and
worship to the present


Village or forest, water or land,

holy is the place where saints dwell.

Holy is the forest.

Holy is the place where the senses are at peace,
where the saint finds refuge and simple delight.

The | Dhammapada


Colorful Crossroads
of an Ancient Culture

me, history, culture, and place possess their

own integrity in Ladakh. Time is patterned of
a different quality in this land; it seems collapsed.
Past and present are more surely together than in
the world we know.

Centuries-old monasteries and fortified vil-
lage walls now in ruins peering down on us are
curious addenda or historical cues as we pass by in
jeep or local bus—private cars are virtually not
present—or afoot or in caravan. Yes, camels and
mules loaded with grain, wool, merchandise, and
objects of today's factories, yesteryear's handwork,
and cottage industries ply the main road.

The camels bespeak millennia of domestica-
tion and movement of peoples and cultures, ideas
and objects between the Mediterranean shores and
this high-lying land route into Central Asia and
China. Standing on the roof atop hill-protected
Himis monastery, one is told that Mongol invaders
swept through the Indus and Leh valleys below,
unknowing of the existence or location of Himis.


360 DR. ROBERT S. RAVICZ CHAPTER SIX

In this Buddhist-majority place not so far west
of Tibet, Muslim boy and Christian girl are wed-
ded in a dazzling two-day ceremonial observance.
A few details may enlighten.

Surrounded by her female kin and dowry
objects, the bride cries and wails during a several-
hour period, awaiting the arrival of the groom and
male kin at her father's house. She is expressing
sadness at leaving her father's home. Her father, in a
large room at the top ofhis three-story home in Leh,
receives gifts and congratulations—of sympathy —at
the loss of his daughter. These are delivered with
expressions of respect and white prayer scarves of
the kind used as offerings or blessings by Buddhists.

The shouting outside signals the arrival of the
groom and kin. As they approach the house they
are showered with epithets and are ritually, but
fairly soundly, struck by the girl's stick-wielding kin
and servants standing on either side of the path to
the house.

At the two feasts, hosted on successive days by
the two fathers, festivities take place in huge tents—
the ground underneath layered three or four deep in
Oriental carpets, rich in color and texture and
association of place: China, Afghanistan, Tibet,
and the geometry of Yarkand and Central Asia.

For the first feast, the girl's father provides
food and wine. Seated at tables, only the Christian
guests drink the wine and eat with spoon and knife;
Muslim guests drink tea and eat with the right
hand, seated on the carpeted ground. No alcoholic


A Moslem village west of Valley and back to warmer
Mulbekh built in the settle- climes before the snows.
ment pattern found through- = Appearances to the contrary,
out Ladakh—a series of most of them are well-off.
ascending terraces rising from _A few are wealthy.

river or stream to fields for

cultivating barley, wheat, and

other foodstuffs, and then to

the dwellings. Buddhist settle-

ments have a gompa, or

monastery, above the rest of

the village. Moslem pas-
_toralists pause near Dras to

rest and smoke tobacco. They

are “transhumants,” whose

regular movements are

patterned by the seasons,

rather than nomads. Each

summer they drive their

animals, primarily sheep

and goats, from Jammu and

Kargil toward the Mulbekh

AVICZ (2)


360 DR. ROBERT S. RAVICZ CHAPTER SIX

beverage is served at the meal of the second night,
sponsored by the groom's father. Before the meal is
served, informal groups of five or six ladies sedately
dance to the wind instruments.

The wedding festivities, as other social and
ceremonial occasions, provide the opportunity for
the display of the best in women's finery; especially
notable are striped silken capes, turquoise-studded
headdresses (perak), and gem-encrusted prayer
boxes suspended from coral-and-pearl necklaces.

In addition to the Moravian church east of
this city of ten thousand, a large mosque is situated
in the center of town near the heart of the com-
mercial district, perhaps the axis of the former Silk
Route—north to Central Asia and China, and the
Wool Road from Tibet south and west to Kashmir
and the markets of India and then to the Western
world, where in England was loomed the finest of
Tibet's wool. Elsewhere in the city, and for hun-
dreds of square miles about, there rise the shrines
and monasteries attesting centuries of the Buddhist
presence.

The new presence comes not as traders, but
as visitors—the foreign tourists who require goods
and services of a new kind and thus commercial-
ize interpersonal relations and begin to turn the
Buddhist ceremonies they come to witness into
entertainment rather than an expression of intrin-
sic values. With their sound and visual recording
equipment, they represent the complex societies
of East and West. Eschewing the two-humped


THE LOST YEARS OF JESUS 23

Noting the appearance of another English
translation of the book, the Times (June 4, 1894)
again conceded that the documents might be
genuine but questioned whether Buddhist records
were of greater value than Christian ones. "It is
to be remembered that we may have here authen-
tic documents, without having authentic records.
Christians know that the doctrines of Sakya Muni
have created a barren civilization. If infidels be-
lieve that the Buddhist records are more worthy of
belief than the Christian, they are very credulous.
Notovitch's discovery is, nevertheless, worthy of
the attention that it is attracting and of the discus-
sions whereof it is the subject.""

Other critics—who not only denied the
authenticity of the documents but also questioned
whether Notovitch had gone to Ladakh at all—were
not so charitable. In the pages of the North Ameri-
can Review, May 1894, Edward Everett Hale, a
prominent Unitarian minister and author, even
questioned the existence of the "somewhat mythical
convent" of Himis, "which we do not find on our
own calendar of Buddhist ecclesiastical establish-
ments near Leh, the capital of Ladak."*°

Hale charged that Notovitch, having previ-
ously written a biography of Alexander III, was
probably the author of The Life of Saint Issa as
well. Among other things, Hale found it hard to
believe that in the course of his travels a lama
should "mention the fact—which oddly enough
had never been mentioned to other travellers —that


LADAKH TODAY BY A CULTURAL ANTHROPOLOGIST 389

Bactrian and horse, they often opt for the rapid
trip by air during the summer months.

Walking for many weeks and during several
voyages makes one singularly aware of the nature
of a place. The color scheme of Ladakh is some-
what muted, but cheery. Grey, white, and brown
indicate mountains, with added tones of mauve
and purple. Whitewashed reliquaries, or chortens,
and similarly colored houses match monastery fa-
cades, which add blue or reddish-colored frames to
the windows.

For the women, coral red and turquoise blue
stones on headdresses and neck ornaments of
pearls provide their favorite expression: the aes-
thetic match of wealth and ornamentation. High
red color in the cheeks characterizes nearly every-
one. Wild flowers seem small, and delicate shades
of pink and yellow predominate. The blue of the
sky appears unmatched by any other blue or any
other sky; the finest of turquoise is graded for
quality against the sky color.

There is immensity and restriction: the sky
expands limitlessly upward, but the high peaks
prevent wide-angle views. The valleys are minis-
cule, limiting numbers and density of population.
Among the people, there appears a boundless sense
of humor, hardiness, and openness.

Physical space is zoned. There is the verdant
green of the riverine terraces, with barley, wheat,
cabbage, radishes, and onions, all of large size,
yielding well.


360 DR. ROBERT S. RAVICZ CHAPTER SIX

Next come the residences—a village rising
above the fields—and, still higher, the monastery,
above which the arid land rises to the snows inter-
spersed with occasional green meadows where the
herds of yak and sheep feed. This is desert, high
desert whose forms and life are patterned by the
great mountains—these Himalayas, upthrust from
the South Asia continental mass through land
movements and geological pressure.

The mountains prevent the southward flow of
wintry winds and climate from Central Asia, mak-
ing most of South Asia tropical, even that portion
lying north of the tropic of Cancer. Rain hardly
ever falls into the valley villages as the mountains
high above catch the monsoon precipitation. There
is arctic cold in the winter to be faced, but with little
or no ice and snow, temperatures 20 to 40 degrees
below zero: dry cold. Some of the waterways freeze,
affording footpaths for those who need to travel, as
walking into the mountains is impossible and the
passes freeze all exit from or access to Ladakh.

People spend much of the wintry cold in a large
kitchen-family room containing an enormous stove.
Since there is littlke wood in this arid world, fuel
consists mainly of animal dung. Architecture also fits
this highly defined ecology—house and monaster-
ies built, when possible, against hillsides. Animals
are confined on the ground floor, and an opening
above them allows their body heat to rise and warm
the residents in the second and third floors.

Ecology and subsistence shape social patterns.


LADAKH TODAY BY A CULTURAL ANTHROPOLOGIST 391

As there is little arable land, it is desirable to keep
its ownership and use within the family. Younger
sons may enter the monastery. If they remain at
home or return home, they may become part ofa
fraternal polyandrous household. Between monas-
tery and village there occurs an exchange of goods
and services; lamas take care of the spiritual life
and they own perhaps half of the land. Villagers
donate food and labor.

In traveling, too, one becomes aware of the
control of the environment on daily activity; thus,
crossing a stream must be planned for morning,
because by afternoon the melting snows turn it
into a raging torrent. It is the rhythm of this
natural process that gives rise to the great river
systems of South Asia providing the possibility of
life for millions of people.

The Indus River in Ladakh runs now placid,
now wild, joining other Himalayan waters to nour-
ish the cultures to the south and west. It is the
same river which supported the development of the
Indus civilizations of Harappa and Mohenjo-daro
five thousand years ago.

What look like ponies to us are small, hardy
horses adapted during several thousand years to the
rigors of the mountain terrain and the needs of
pastoral people. They yield milk and butter and
serve with amazing dexterity and maneuverability
the arduous task of herding yaks along the broken
and steep-sided mountain slopes.

When marriage occurs between persons of


360 DR. ROBERT S. RAVICZ CHAPTER SIX

different villages, the groom and family bring the
bride ceremoniously to their village. Riding ponies,
accompanied by lamas in ritual dress, they take a
rest stop in a mountain meadow; all dismount to
watch the lamas dance, then proceed to their
destination—bride and groom tied together on one
horse, symbolically associated in life.

The sound ofa chime through passes or on a
mountain path or in valleys comes from a bell
made of a blend of metals suspended round the
horse's neck, and it arouses our awareness that it is
one of the few sounds in this dramatic landscape.


Chapter Seven

epilogue

A Tale of Two Worlds


J. MICHAEL SPOONER

JESUS APPROACHING LADAKH AS A YOUTH


A Few Final Questions

T recapitulate: Notovitch said he was told by a
lama at Mulbekh in 1887 that there were
records of the life of Saint Issa at Lhasa and other
principal monasteries. He then claimed to have
seen such a document at Himis and in 1894
published the verses allegedly read to him, as
translated by his interpreter. The book created a
controversy which appeared to be resolved when
Professor J. Archibald Douglas went to Himis and
took a deposition from the head lama, who claimed
that all the salient points of Notovitch's story were
completely false.

In 1922, Swami Abhedananda went to Himis,
inquired about Notovitch and his discovery, and
was told just the opposite. Not only did the lama
confirm Notovitch's story, but in turn he also
helped Abhedananda translate the same verses,
which the Swami later published in Bengali in In
Kashmir and Tibet along with a part of Notovitch's
English rendition of the text. In addition, Abheda-
nanda verified many of the particulars of Noto-
vitch's story which were under question.


396 EPILOGUE CHAPTER SEVEN

In 1925, while leading an expedition through
Central Asia, Nicholas Roerich visited Himis. He
later published writings he discovered at the monas-
tery and/or elsewhere which paralleled Notovitch’'s.
He also reported finding throughout his journey
many other accounts, both written and oral, of
Issa's sojourn in the East. He was well aware of
Notovitch's book but in no way was he dependent
upon it for his material. His son George Roerich,
who was a noted Orientalist and spoke Tibetan, no
doubt would have noticed if they had been pre-
sented with a fraudulent document.

Finally, in 1939, with no prior knowledge of
the Issa legends or of Notovitch's book, Elisabeth
Caspari was shown three books by the librarian at
Himis who explained, "These books say your Jesus
was here!"

It is usually about this time in the story that
the detective is sitting—or pacing slowly back and
forth if he is the type—in a large, mahogany-
paneled study. There is a roaring fire in the large
stone fireplace. The dialogue may differ slightly,
but the questions are always the same. Why? What
does it all mean?

Could all three men—Notovitch, Abheda-
nanda, and Roerich—have fabricated their stories
or been fooled by various lamas? Highly unlikely.
And what about Elisabeth Caspari? And then Jus-
tice Bill Douglas and world traveler Ed Noack and
Professor Bob Ravicz and others like them who may


A FEW FINAL QUESTIONS 397

yet turn up? Could there be some self-perpetuating
conspiracy to play a joke on the Western world
going on at Himis? Again, not likely. As Professor
Roerich put it, "In what possible way could a recent
forgery penetrate into the consciousness of the
whole East?"

Well, reasons our ruminating detective, the
whole notion of Jesus going to India, while improb-
able to many in the West, is still alive in the East.
He recalls that in The Lost Years of Jesus Revealed,
Dr. Charles Francis Potter observed that his book
about Jesus and the Essenes was popular in India.
"It seems," Potter wrote, "that many Hindus be-
lieve that Jesus’ 'Lost Years' were, partly at least,
spent in India, getting much of his best teaching
from the Vedas.! Didn't he say, 'Take my yoga upon
you and learn of me, for my yoga is easy'?"?

Suppose, then, the text (or texts) exists and the
story is true? Then what? At this point, the detec-
tive leans against the mantle and looks intently into
the flames. A burning log pops, sending sparks up
the flue, and slowly the sine qua non of every
working detective—a theory—begins to emerge:

Jesus, he reflects, is generally thought to have
learned everything from Moses and the prophets
and was otherwise God-taught. And yet The Life of
Saint Issa and other jewels from the heart of Asia
say just the opposite—i.e., that he went east "with
the object of perfecting himself in the Divine Word
and of studying the laws of the great Buddhas."


398 EPILOGUE CHAPTER SEVEN

During the course of his travels, Jesus seems
to have met with Eastern holy men—for a purpose.
It appears that he sought them out and planned his
itinerary around extended sojourns at the most
notable spiritual communities of the day—to in-
vestigate, observe, and gather notes for a work he
was to write—penned with his lifeblood.

According to the texts and legends, there
among those of like mind (those whose probings
beyond the tangible were provocative of the new era
heralded by the birth of Christ) he prayed, medi-
tated, practiced yoga, studied, and taught. Clearly
he is remembered by both worlds as having healed
the sick, raised the dead, exhorted the people to
Love, and challenged their entrenched oppressors.
He exposed the same hypocrisy he was to denounce
in the priest class of Palestine, pronouncing depre-
catory woes upon Brahmans, Kshatriyas, and law-
yers alike, casting out all manner of possessing
demons; in sum, doing all those things for which he
would later pay dearly with his life—the life with
which he narrowly escaped the Eastern theatre.

And if we read between the lines and consider his
extraordinary acts—most certainly not denying but
fulfilling the laws of material and spiritual physics-
it is also quite clear that he sought and attained
adeptship over the elements and elemental forces as
well as control of the heartbeat and body functions.
And that he mastered the arts of bilocation and
alchemy—observable later in his sudden appear-
ances and disappearances,’ in his transmutation of


J 24 ELIZABETH CLARE PROPHET CHAPTER ONE

at Lassa there are ancient memoirs of the life of
Jesus Christ."

Nor was Hale willing to accept the Russian's
version of how the chief lama at Himis came to
show him the documents. Recounting the event,
Hale wrote, "He was obliged to seek the hospitality
of the convent of Himis again, and while the
broken parts were knitting together he skilfully led
conversation round to the old manuscripts."

Notwithstanding the fact that Hale's "skilfully
led conversation" is a departure from Notovitch's
"earnest entreaties," he asserted, "it was as if a
Buddhist delegate to the Parliament of Religions
had been wounded in watching a Princeton foot-
ball match, and Dr. McCosh [president of the
College of New Jersey, renamed Princeton Univer-
sity] had received him to his hospitality. What
more natural than that Dr. McCosh should give
his guest a New Testament?"

In October 1894, F. Max Miiller, professor of
modern European languages and comparative phi-
lology at Oxford University, entered the lists.
Miiller, editor of the Rig Veda and The Sacred
Books of the East, was a scholar of renown and a
noted Orientalist. He published "The Alleged
Sojourn of Christ in India," a critique of The
Unknown Life of Jesus Christ, in the Nineteenth
Century, a scholarly review.*! Miiller was con-
vinced that The Life of Saint Issa was a fraud,
possibly carried out by the lamas at Himis, but


A FEW FINAL QUESTIONS 399

ordinary water into the finest wine,* and in his
conversion of lukewarm ‘omnidirectional’ souls
into one-pointed fiery devotees.

All this he did and more, not as a god but in
fulfillment of a known path of self-mastery, a
natural soul-evolution unto the unleashing of the
imprisoned splendor within. He seems to have been
making a strong statement, etched in every foot-
print, that his was a path preordained by the Father,
obtainable by all of His sons—if they will but keep
on keeping on, with gusto and good cheer.

Was it a dress rehearsal for his Palestinian
mission? Or was it that and more?

Was he the wise student in search of the wiser
Teacher? Had he probed the periphery of knowl-
edge in his home country only to go forth pushing
back, mile upon mile (the Father's sheer will
empowering his own)—yes, pushing back the bar-
riers of the mind well beyond the horizon of his
childhood tutors’ time and space?

Was he the real Revolutionary—rabble-rouser
as he was to be called —of the Spirit in search of His
Kingdom, truly His own Higher Consciousness? Is
this what he found at the Top of the World —his
own Shangri-la? Both without in the sacred shrines
and mystic mountains and lush valleys cradling
those peculiar people with the shining eyes so full
of soul fire? And within in the secret chamber of
his own precious heart where burns the threefold
flame? And was his Self-discovery the key to his
strength that endured, as none other has endured,


400 EPILOGUE CHAPTER SEVEN

while carrying the full weight of world karma—the
Piscean cross?

Did he meet Maitreya face to face, as Moses
before him had talked with his Hierarch?

Did he know Gautama in his innermost being?

Did he ascend the crystal cord and through
the crown chakra embrace Sanat Kumara?

Coming down from the clouds with a mental
thud—having gone about as far out, and farther, as
a self-possessed chap such as he might venture
without going completely off the deep end (Scot-
land Yard notwithstanding)—our detective waxes
methodical, even empirical: There are still some
loose ends. After all, he reminds himself, he doesn't
know what became of Notovitch. Or of Douglas,
for that matter. Nor can he verify by his own witness
the actuality or the authenticity of the manuscripts
either in the past or the present. "So what have
I proven?" he chastises himself for allowing himself
to get so carried away with the Jesus mystery.

Despite his self-doubt, whose shadow flickers
on the wall, he scratches his head and dares to list
A Few Final Questions:

Why do you suppose, really, that the vast
majority of people in the West are unfamiliar with
the theory, so widely accepted in the East, that
Jesus Christ, the avatar of the Piscean age, went to
India and Tibet during the so-called lost years?

Have the facts been intentionally suppressed?
By himself? (Until the time appointed?) By the
Gospel writers? (According to his prophecy, that


A FEW FINAL QUESTIONS 401

the Holy Ghost should first come ere the secrets be
revealed?5) Or by devilish design—by later editors?
(To suppress the imitation of Christ and His Path by
future generations of His spiritual seed?) Are there
yet to be unearthed in the Vatican sixty-three manu-
scripts, or parts thereof, dealing with this very sub-
ject, as the Russian journalist was given to believe?

Did Jesus journey elsewhere during the course
of his life? To Britain as a youth with his Uncle
Joseph (of Arimathea) to be educated in the well-
established schools of the ancient Druids who, we
hear tell, took their lessons from Pythagoras? ("This
is a bit much, old boy—even for the most progres-
sive detective I know!" he remonstrates. “However,”
retorts the other side of himself, "the legend has
persisted among the Britons for centuries!")

No wonder the Jews marveled, saying, "How
knoweth this man letters, having never learned?"®
Maybe it was they who never learned that he had
traversed many worlds and had been taught, as
Enoch was, by the Father and his angelic emissar-
ies, some robed in flesh, some not.

Exactly how long did he live, physically, after
the resurrection!

If I'm not mistaken, our sleuth carries on,
unable to stop the spinning wheels of the mind,
didn't Paul and Peter meet him in the way numer-
ous times and talk with him easily—after the
Bethany ‘disappearance’ generally pinpointed as
the Ascension?’ How many "goings and comings"
were there anyway!


402 EPILOGUE CHAPTER SEVEN

And which one was the final one?

Did the Master demonstrate his apparent adept-
ship both in surviving the crucifixion and in dis-
appearing from their sight in that 'Cloud' atop
Bethany's hill? Did he (our detective summons his
most courageous posture) thus exit the Palestinian
scene, his point made, and go on to preach and
teach his disciples, as Church Father Irenaeus
wrote—spending his final years in the magical land
of Kashmir, as some say? Maybe he never even died!
Maybe he just transcended earthly life in stages-
just like that—only to disappear from sight forever
in a final, as they say, Mahasamadhi called by
theologians the Ascension.

But, then, for the last almost two thousand
years his followers in great numbers have claimed to
have seen him, talked with him, heard his voice,
been healed by him, and even supped with him!

He seems to recall, his mind now racing,
sweat beaded on his brow, there are strong tra-
ditions indicating that following the crucifixion
Martha with Mary Magdalene, other Marys, and
Lazarus went to France to propagate the Faith. The
church of her ministry still stands in Tarascon, the
repository of her relics.

Were these chief disciples of the Lord in Gaul
tending the needs of the World Teacher and his
disciples? If indeed he were alive, they could only
be, if they had any choice in the matter, where
their Lord was. "For wheresoever the carcase is,
there will the eagles be gathered together."*.. .Was


A FEW FINAL QUESTIONS 403

Jesus dropping a hint—if you are looking for me,
look for my chief disciples? Did Jesus actually
intend, as some have attempted to prove, to estab-
lish both a kingdom and a lineage of the sons of
God? And, having done so, did he then move on,
the eternal Youth, to new circumstances and other
sheep in the Far East?

Could he be like le Comte de Saint Germain—
the Wonderman of Europe (who came after him yet
was before him)—the man who never dies, knows
everything, and moves from place to place bearing
his elixir of liquid Light to all who believe the Truth
and take up the Cross and follow him?...

Just when you think you're getting a handle
on the case, an undisclosed source comes up with
another yellowed folder. The information now on
our desk is beginning to piece together—from the
pages of history, the records of akasha, and the
indelible race memory of the ever-living profile of
the best of the sons of men... evidence that must
be saved for the next volume.

Where will it all end? You shake your head,
pick up your file and, Diogenes’ lantern in hand,
go out into the night looking for the only one who
really knows the answer.




ChapterEight

Credits

After the Final Curtain
A Tribute to the Scriptwriter and the Cast


All the world’s a_ stage,

And all the men and women merely players:
They have their exits and their entrances,
And one man in his time plays many parts...

Shakespeare, As You Like It


Acknowledgment of Collaborators

I his Divine Mystery has been in the making for
two thousand years and longer. All the players

and their parts have passed before us on the screen
of life. And the drama of those sent by the angels
to trace the footsteps of Christ—though some
knew not the holy ground they trod—was in some
ways as suspenseful as that of the original Teacher
and his apostles.

The events that transpired during the hitherto
unknown life of Christ, the so-called missing
years, were scripted by God long before our minds
could capture their reality in the Word made flesh.
He, too, authored the lines of the supporting cast
whose steps we herein retrace—those other pil-
grims who came upon the scene, and anonymous,
haloed scribes who in their own time and place
cherished his blessed feet.. .and recorded their
peregrinations.

This is the strong meat of the Word! whose
time has come! The long-lost 'missing' chapters in
the Greatest Story Ever Told and the Greatest Life
Ever Lived. It could not remain hidden;? for his


408 CREDITS CHAPTER EIGHT

people, his very own—they must know. By the
hand of God the evidence has been kept. Untold
numbers have played their parts sometimes alto-
gether unconscious of the flame in that invisible
torch they were passing hand to hand, mouth to
mouth, heart to heart of the memory of this Son of
God, this Saviour who so changed the world that
neither it nor we shall ever be the same.

We who have joined forces to pull the threads to-
gether, piece the pieces of the puzzle, and organize
the chapters are the least of the players in this two-
thousand-year cast of torchbearers in the night. The
strokes of our pen and our musings must be a monu-
ment to the Father and his recording angels who held
it all together and kept it for the appointed time.

"Behold, now is the accepted time; behold, now
is the day of salvation!"...So the apostle cried.'

I believe that today as never before followers of
the Messiah from every walk of life are ready to
consider an unorthodox approach to the life and
mission of the one God-man above all others who,
if he has not already done so, may yet make the
greatest impact on their lives and spirits.

The ramifications of Jesus' journey to the East
are staggering. Dare we finally consider that he
who humbled himself as a man for our sakes also
took up the role of student under his predecessors,
the great Lights of antiquity, demonstrating for our
sakes that he who would be Master must first be
servant?> That he who would teach must first
study—to show himself approved unto God?¢ And


THE LOST YEARS OF JESUS 23

most likely perpetrated by the Russian journalist.
In fact, he was far from certain the Russian had
even gone to Himis.

The Oxford professor claimed that after mak-
ing on-the-spot inquiries, Moravian missionaries
and English officers reported that no Russian by
the name of Notovitch had passed through Leh
and no one had been laid up at Himis with a
broken leg. He speculated that "M. Notovitch may
have travelled in disguise." But then he argued
that, assuming "M. Notovitch is a gentleman and
not a liar" and did go to Himis, he was far too easy
prey for Buddhist monks "Who enjoy mystifying
inquisitive travellers"—not that he would have
been the first traveler to be given the manuscripts
he was seeking "for a consideration."

Miiller admits a certain amount of plausibility
in parts of Notovitch's tale. Pali was the language
of Buddhism and Buddhism did reach Tibet
through Nepal. But there were two parts of Noto-
vitch's story that Miiller found "impossible, or next
to impossible." The first, that the Jews who came
to India from Palestine in about A.D. 35 should
have met the very people who had known Issa
when he was a student at Benares.

According to the Oxford savant, the Russian
traveler should have been

a little more skeptical when he was told that

the Jewish merchants who arrived in India
immediately after the Crucifixion knew not


ACKNOWLEDGMENT OF COLLABORATORS 409

that the Saviour of all men is bound by the One
who sent him to provide a message and an example
relevant to all men—that through the very fabric
and language and ritual of their own religious
traditions, they, too, might "behold his Glory"?

How could Hindu or Buddhist or Zoroastrian or
Confucian, then or now, find relevancy to the Son
of God (or to His vessel, the Son of man) against the
backdrop of Torah or Talmud or Hebrew prophets?
He who was the embodiment of the consummate
Light of history—the best of all the sons of men-
must also be the embodiment of the summum
bonum of every world religion, the epitome of its
teaching and example anticipated, looked forward
to, both by its doctrine and its body of believers.

Did he come only for the Jews? If so, did he
go to the East in search of the lost tribes who had
migrated there? And more? Those "other sheep" he
said were his, yet "not of this fold"?°

All had been done before—India was a dress
rehearsal for the great play (lila), the epic of the mil-
lennia. Surely, this youth, wise among the scholars
of Jerusalem before his departure for the East,?
would have no difficulty in outsmarting the Brah-
mans in their own conceit or exposing their de-
ceptions to the people!’—precisely as he was to
overturn the moneychangers in the temple upon his
return to Palestine."

It was the conspiring of Father and Son to use
the Eastern stage as the trial run for the all-time
hit—the classic number-one drama of the Son's


410 CREDITS CHAPTER EIGHT

triumph over the forces of Evil, portraying a brief
but magnificently directed ministry (directed by
the Divine Director who sent him) that would
make plain the essential truths, in parable and sign
and wonder, of the Eastern repository of wisdom.

Jesus' weaving of the threads of eternity into a
life and scripture to be uniquely savoured by the
Western mind is his great legacy to souls born to a
civilization unawakened to the memories of the
Motherland!*—realities that dance easily, a priori,
in the hearts of India's children. The clues are
there, if one will look for them with a willingness
to see, in every fragment remaining from Gospel
writers, Gnostics, apocryphal accounts, Church
Fathers and a few historical notations—and in
much that has been taken from us by evildoers,
tamperers with Holy Writ, who, uncommissioned
by us, have probated our spiritual inheritance-
Christ's last will and testament.

Today the Lord would return to us the forgot-
ten and lost books, a vast Teaching for the libera-
tion of our spirits. And Comfort for our trials of
karma in these latter days. Through unseen hands
and many unsung heroes He has found the way, as
He always does, to reach us in our extremity with
His Truth and Love. His reassuring words ring like
the bells of Ladakh with their all-pervasive crystal-
line sound:

And I will pray the Father and He shall
give you another Comforter, that He may
abide with you forever;


ACKNOWLEDGMENT OF COLLABORATORS 411

Even the Spirit of Truth, whom the
world cannot receive because it seeth Him
not, neither knoweth Him: but ye know
Him, for He dwelleth with you and shall be
in you.

I will not leave you comfortless; I will
come to you.

Yet a little while and the world seeth
me no more; but ye see me: because I live,
ye shall live also.

At that day ye shall know that I AM in
my Father, and ye in me, and I in you....

These things have I spoken unto you,
being yet present with you. But the Com-
forter, which is the Holy Ghost, whom the
Father will send in my name, He shall teach
you all things and bring all things to your
remembrance, whatsoever I have said unto
you...."

Verily, verily, I say unto you, He that
believeth on me, the works that I do shall he
do also; and greater works than these shall
he do, because I go unto my Father.#

The curtain is going up on the final act: Jesus
spotlighted stage right (the Father seated, center
background, in the twilight of humanity's unaware-
ness) is in the role of initiate on the path of personal
Christhood. He emerges vigorous, viable, from the
parchments of the lost years, as the personification
in the flesh of the same Law ‘written in our inward
parts''5 whose outer sign we have been waiting for.


412 CREDITS CHAPTER EIGHT

The One sent to save us has come to portray
our mission in life. This he has chosen to do against
the backdrop of his own soul's victory over Death
and Hell. Now we know—for we see him face to
face, we are known of him, and we would be like
him!*—that we, too, must pursue the calling of
Christ's works, shunning not the goal of self-mas-
tery which our own Teacher's discipleship discloses.

Not forever sinners are we, nor disciples ever
learning but never able to come to the knowledge
of the Truth.!7 We would espouse the goal of friend
of Christ,!® of brother, sister, and finally, fully,
joint-heirs’® of the same mantle of Sonship he put
on (for our learning and example)—though all the
while He forever is, was the Son of God: 'from the
beginning’, The-Before-Abraham-Was-"I AM."2°

Seeing him standing there, our eyes are trans-
fixed. Before us his figure merges with the ancient
scenes and we see as if on film the records of all
that transpired in his life—from birth and child-
hood through his youth and missing years, his
ministry and beyond, until the scenes fade into the
mists of ensuing centuries.

Having so seen his magnificent performance,
we can only confirm the immortal Truth that
within us this Son also dwells: within us this Sun of
Righteousness shall also rise!?! This is the message
of his dramatization of our life as seen through his.
That we, too, shall see the Daystar from on high?
appearing in the beautiful Presence of the 1 AM
THAT I AM?'—the same, the One whom our Lord


ACKNOWLEDGMENT OF COLLABORATORS 413

addressed saying, "Abba, Father."*4 This is the
communication of his heart. He speaks no longer in
parable but tells us:

We, too, can try. We can set the goal of
Christhood for our life. See before and above us the
Light of our God-Reality beaming, beckoning us
onward. We can follow our Lord all the way to the
Himalayas and Home again—awakened at last to
the kingdom (consciousness) within, whose unlim-
ited energy Source and creative Power he tapped,
assuring us access in this time of trouble* to the
sublime Universal One: “Greater is He that is in
you than he that is in the world.”

The house lights are on, the curtain is closed.
There are no bows or encores by the cast. We
apprehend the message: It is we who are on stage.
And the curtain is about to go up on our final
embodiment.

Let us ready ourselves to demonstrate the same
spiritual Self-knowledge he possessed to a world
that has waited too long for the Truth.?”? A Truth
so desperately needed to forestall the prophesied
calamities of the Day of Vengeance of our God.*®
The Truth of the sacred fire that burns in the breasts
of all God's children and of the threefold flame of
the Trinity he bore, nation to nation, in his heart's
chalice as he went his way in search of "them that
were lost."

By God, we must not, in his name we can-
not—fail!


414 CREDITS CHAPTER EIGHT

May hearts one with his find in these tracings
of the life of Jesus the thread of contact with their
own immortal destiny to be outplayed on the world
stage here and now. For, no otherworldly Master is
our Issa. He moves among us, despite the gruel of
the false pastors, to tell us one by one—because he
loves us—the true gospel of his everlasting king-
dom so imminent in the very midst of the chaotic
world scene.

Two thousand years hence he is still looking
for pragmatic laborers for his harvest’? who will
wield his two-edged sword of the Spirit." The
Faithful and True with us summons his armies,'2
conscripted from among us, to pierce illusions,
strong delusions, about to drown soul and society
in a cataclysm of major proportions. And if it
come, such planetary upheaval will be the return
current (karma) of our ignorance (ignoring) of the
Law, our self-slavery to false gods, our nonap-
propriation of God's grace that all around us hangs
fragrant in the air like sweet wisteria in summer.

We put down our pen and send this book on
its way to you, dear seeker, that in the final hours
of your own life's drama, you might reach, if you
will, for the Star of your Divinity so nobly, so
passionately displayed on the world stage by our
brother Jesus. And in his name hurl it into the
midst of chaos to sound the single note of Christ's
victory in another soul...and of the Truth that
shall make all men free.


ACKNOWLEDGMENT OF COLLABORATORS 415

Wherefore, in the light of all that has gone
before and all that is to come, the author does
acknowledge and express her profound appreciation
for the cooperation and true spirit of givingness of
the following collaborators on this volume—with-
out whose contributions The Lost Years of Jesus
would not be the bearer to you, the reader, of that
fullness of joy which was borne by all the players
whose eyewitness accounts unfold the drama of
Saint Issa:

Dr. Robert S. Ravicz—professor of anthropol-
ogy at California State University, Northridge, for
his most necessary concluding chapter bringing to
the pilgrim who has followed Issa and his chroni-
clers, through photographic and personal impres-
sions, his feeling for the colorful people of "Little
Tibet" today. We are indebted to Dr. Ravicz for his
sensitive portraits of those who sit atop the world on
one of history's heretofore best-kept secrets and for his
captions which lead us through their everyday lives.

Dr. John C. Trever—director of the Dead Sea
Scrolls Project of the School of Theology at Clare-
mont, California, for his generous gift of time and
knowledge on the history of early Christianity, and
for his lifetime scholarship and devotion to the
subject, which so enriched our understanding.

Elisabeth Caspari—for the hearty soul she is
to have made the trek at all and then for sharing her
fascinating story and so many pertinent photo-
graphs which no doubt retrieve that which was
lost by Notovitch's servant— photographs taken by


416 CREDITS CHAPTER EIGHT

herself and her late husband Charles, whose brave
spirit we also salute. Mrs. Clarence Gasque—in
memory, for her inquiring spiritual mind and life-
long support of universal Truth and for organizing
and financing the trip, thus preparing the way for
the jackpot: "These books say your Jesus was herei"

Edward F. Noack—traveler to the forbidden
lands of the East, for his lifelong one-pointedness
to the high country of the Himalayas that led him
and Mrs. Helen Noack, his companion trailblazer,
to the special spot; and for his sharing of his
photographs and his love.

Jayasri Majumdar, Per Sinclair, and Prasan
Kumar De—for their translation of In Kashmir and
Tibet, freely given to the glory of God, rendered
with the goal of the meeting of East and West, and
conveyed for the opening of our understanding.

Richard and Janet Bock—for taking five years
of their lives to painstakingly illustrate on film The
Lost Years and for allowing us free use of their
achievement, which has inspired many to pursue
the quest of the historical Jesus to the incarnation
of the avatar; for their generous consideration in
allowing us the use of the title The Lost Years of
Jesus for this volume; and not least, for Janet Bock's
effort and joy in writing her popular paperback,
The Jesus Mystery, which in 1980 reacquainted the
West with the discoveries of Notovitch, Roerich,
and Abhedananda.

J. Michael Spooner—for his evident delight in
executing in the artistic tradition of Nicholas


ACKNOWLEDGMENT OF COLLABORATORS 417

Roerich the cover painting of Jesus Approaching
Ladakh as a Youth, whose conception was born out
of our mutual desire to inspire this generation to
pursue the holy mountain of God in the Master's
footsteps.

The beloved staff of Summit University
Press—including Editorial, Research, Graphic
Arts, and Printing—the salt of the earth, more
precious than the gold of Ophir," without whom
this book would not have been born! And all of the
co-workers of our community at Camelot and the
Royal Teton Ranch, whose support, service, and
unspeakable Love are surely a tribute to the eternal
path of Saint Issa, their guiding Light.

lng bith Cas lee pki

The Western Shamballa
All Saints Day, 1984


Notes

Chapter One THE LOST YEARS OF JESUS

1.

2.

Raymond E. Brown, The Birth of the Messiah (Garden
City, N.Y.: Doubleday & Co., 1977), pp. 513-16.
It was a common practice in Israel to compile genealogical
records, especially since succession to high priest and to
leadership of tribe, of tribal family, and of father's house
depended on lineage. Records are traceable from the begin-
ning of the Hebrew nation (Num. 1:2, 18; I Chron. 5:7, 17).

Biblical genealogies were seldom concerned with
purely biological descent, and generation was only one
way of getting a son. A man could adopt a child simply by
declaring him to be his son or, posthumously, by the law
of the levirate marriage wherein the brother of the de-
ceased was required to marry his childless widow and raise
up seed in his name (Deut. 25:5-10).

Members ofa tribe or clan traced their lineage from
a common ancestor by fact or legal fiction, i.e., those
who were not of natural descent were effectively amal-
gamated into the group by the adoption of its ancestors.
Ancient chroniclers frequently preferred symmetry (often
based on a pattern of seven or ten generations) to the
unbroken line of father to son; links were freely omitted to
preserve the numerical scheme.

Remarkably different genealogies for Jesus appear in
the Gospels of Matthew and Luke. Matthew's genealogy
(1:1-17) contains forty-two names listed in descending


J 26 ELIZABETH CLARE PROPHET CHAPTER ONE

only what had happened to Christ in Pal-
estine, but also what had happened to Jesus,
or Issa, while he spent fifteen years of his
life among the Brahmans and Buddhists in
India, learning Sanskrit and Pali, and study-
ing the Vedas and the Tripifaka. With all
their cleverness the Buddhist monks would
have found it hard to answer the question,
how these Jewish merchants met the very
people who had known Issa as a casual
student of Sanskrit and Pali in India—for
India is a large term—and still more, how
those who had known Issa as a simple stu-
dent in India saw at once that he was the
same person who had been put to death
under Pontius Pilate.

The other factor which Miiller thought dis-
credited The Life of Saint Issa was the fact that it
was not listed in either the Kanjur or the Tanjur—
the standard catalogues of translated Buddhist
sacred texts and commentaries.

Finally, Miiller took issue with comments the
Russian author had made in his preface. Notovitch
said that he never doubted the authenticity of the
chronicle and determined to publish it upon his
return to Europe. But before he did so, he claimed
he addressed himself to several well-known eccle-
siastics, including a Monsignor Platon of Kiev,
who reportedly tried to dissuade him from publish-
ing them. He also claimed to have showed them to
an unnamed cardinal on good terms with the


NOTES TO PAGE 3 419

order from Abraham to Jesus, artificially grouped into
three fourteen-generation periods: the pre-monarchical
period, Abraham to David (750 years); the monarchical
period, David to the Babylonian Exile (400 years); the post-
monarchical period, Babylonian Exile to Jesus (575 years).

In order to maintain the stylized fourteen-genera-
tion scheme, Matthew had to eliminate four kings be-
tween Solomon and Jechonias. There are only thirteen
names in his third set of fourteen generations. Since
Matthew could count, some believe that one name was
dropped from the list by an early copyist, lost forever.

The genealogy of Luke (3:23—38) moves in ascend-
ing order from Jesus back to Adam. While Matthew has
forty-two names, Luke has seventy-seven (thirty-six of
which are completely unknown) organized into eleven
sets of seven. In all but the first two groupings, the last
name of each of the sets of seven (David, Joshua, Joseph,
etc.) marks some sort of a climax, calling to mind a
historic panorama covering the departure from Ur, the
enslavement in Egypt, the first monarchy, the long period
of messianic expectation, the Babylonian Exile, the sec-
ond monarchy, and the era of the true Messiah. Since the
number seven figures so prominently in their genealogical
arrangements, Matthew and Luke may have had some
kind of numerological pattern in mind.

There are other important differences between the
two texts. Matthew intends to demonstrate that Jesus is the
Davidic Messiah; Luke to show he is the Son of God.
Luke's line contains fifty-six names from Abraham to
Jesus; Matthew's, forty-one. The section from Abraham
to David is the only place the two lists show any extended
agreement. The two lines diverge at David—Matthew's
passes through Solomon while Luke's passes through his
brother Nathan. They come together briefly at Shealtiel
and Zerubbabel, and then diverge again. With the excep-
tion of these two names, and Joseph and Jesus, the two
lists contain different names, about whom nothing is
known since they are not mentioned in either the Old


420NOTES TO PAGES 278-397

Testament or the interbiblical literature. Despite the dis-
crepancies, most scholars believe the gospelers were work-
ing from known genealogical records and traditions.

The early Church accepted both lists as the lineage
of Joseph. The first person known to have looked into the
question of the divergent genealogies was Julius Africanus
(c. A.D. 220). His explanation for the seemingly irrecon-
cilable differences depends upon the law of levirate mar-
riage, which held that ifa married man died childless, his
brother was required to marry his widow and raise up seed
in his name. The firstborn son of that union would be
considered the child of the deceased brother rather than of
the biological father.

Africanus suggested that Joseph's grandfathers,
Matthan (from Matthew's genealogy) and Melchi (from
Luke's), married successively the same woman, Estha—
first Matthan and, when he died, Melchi. Their sons,
Jacob and Heli, were half-brothers of the same mother
but different fathers. Heli married but died childless.
According to the law of the levirate marriage, Jacob
married his brother's wife and begot Joseph. As a result,
Matthew could say "Jacob begat Joseph" and Luke,
"Joseph, the son of Heli."

Since both Gospel writers are trying to establish by
their genealogies a claim to legitimate Davidic ancestry,
some have argued that Matthew's table contains the legal
successors to the throne of David while Luke's contains
the paternal ancestors of Joseph.

Another solution is that Matthew gives Joseph's
genealogy while Luke gives Mary's. (There is also minor
support for the reverse.) This solution, usually credited to
Annius Viterbo (c. 1490), became more popular after the
Reformation, but its roots are traceable to the fifth cen-
tury and possibly even to the second-century writings of
Justin Martyr. Since lineal descent passed through the
man, it has been argued that no genealogy of a woman
was ever given and that descent through women was
considered to be of no account to the Jews. An examina-
tion of the scriptures shows that was not always the case.


NOTES TO PAGE3 421

There is a lengthy genealogy of Judith (8:1) and genealogies
of heiresses in both Numbers and Chronicles. That Luke
wrote the genealogy of Mary finds acceptance with the
Eastern Orthodox church, the Coptic church, and some
Western scholars, such as the editors of The Scofield
Reference __ Bible.

Both genealogies are intimately related to the con-
cept of the virginal conception—i.e., the doctrine that
Jesus was conceived by the Holy Ghost without the agency
of his father, Joseph, and hence was born of a virgin—
usually referred to as the virgin birth.

It is not the purpose of the genealogies to defend the
virginal conception of Jesus; that is its presupposition—
at least in the case of Matthew. Immediately after the
genealogy Matthew includes a short passage which ex-
plains how Jesus was conceived (Matt. 1:18-25).

"Now the birth of Jesus Christ was on this wise:
When as his mother Mary was espoused to Joseph, before
they came together, she was found with child of the Holy
Ghost" (Matt. 1:18), which occurred in fulfillment of
that "which was spoken of the Lord by the prophet, saying,
Behold, a virgin shall be with child, and shall bring forth
a son, and they shall call his name Emmanuel, which
being interpreted is, God with us" (Matt. 1:22, 23).

One purpose of this passage is to show that Jesus
was incorporated by divine command into the house of
David, which occurred when Joseph named his son—an
exercise that would have been unnecessary if Joseph had
been Jesus’ natural father. Joseph's act of naming the
child, which is the prerogative of the father, is also an act
of adoption and thus inclusion into the Davidic line.

It is likely that the author of this part of Matthew
had a "Messianic proof text"—that is, a list of passages
lifted from the Old Testament to demonstrate that Jesus
was the Messiah, used as a preaching aid by early Chris-
tians—and took from it a mistranslated version of Isaiah
7:14 and incorporated it into the infancy narrative (Matt.

*All Bible references are King James Version (KJV) unless otherwise noted.
RSV: Revised Standard Version; JB: Jerusalem Bible.


422 NOTES TO PAGES 278-397

1:22, 23). The passage in Isaiah reads in the King James
Version: "Therefore the Lord himself shall give you a sign;
Behold, a virgin shall conceive, and bear a son, and shall
call his name Immanuel.” Any discussion of the virginal con-
ception, particularly with reference to Matthew, must take
into consideration Isaiah 7:10-17, particularly verse 14.

Examination of Isaiah 7:14 (and whether it proph-
esied the birth of the Messiah) and of the use and meaning
of the word "virgin"—especially as it forecast the virginal
conception as a Messianic sign—has given rise to some of
the most famous debates in theological history.

Some versions of the Old Testament use the words "a
young woman" (RSV) or "maiden" (JB) rather than "virgin."
The text of the Isaiah scroll found at Qumran library has
made it clear that the original Hebrew word used to
describe the woman was almd, which means "young
woman.” Since the verse in the original says “the young
woman," it is likely the young girl was someone known to
Isaiah and King Ahaz. The almd is certainly a young girl who
has reached puberty and is thus marriageable if not already
married and, given the context, may be referring to the wife
of the king or the wife of Isaiah. But it is not clear whether
she is a virgin and, if not, if she was already pregnant.

When the Hebrew Masoretic text of the Old Testa-
ment was translated into Creek in the Septuagint, the
word almd was translated (for reasons that are not clear)
into the word parthenos, which means "virgin," rather
than neanis, literally "a young woman." Some scholars
believe this was done in the last century before the birth
of Jesus. But there is no existing Greek manuscript that
was taken from the Hebrew prior to Christian times to
show that. Consequently, it is impossible to determine
who changed the word, and thus the interpretation of
Isaiah 7:14, and whether it was done by Jews prior to the
birth of Jesus or by Christians after the time of Jesus
tampering with the Septuagint text in order to bring the
translation into line with the virgin doctrine. (Later edi-
tors of the Septuagint deleted parthenos and reverted to


NOTES TO PAGE3 423

neanis to bring the Greek text into conformity with the
Hebrew original.) In any event, the Greek translation
parthenos (virgin) still would have meant that a woman
who is now a virgin will, by natural means, once she has
united with her husband, conceive the child Immanuel.

While scholars do not agree on the identity of the
child, at most it may refer to a Davidic prince who would
deliver Judah from her enemies. What is really at issue in
Isaiah 7:14 is not the manner of conception, nor the
prophecy of the Messiah—messianism had not yet devel-
oped to the point of expecting a single future king—but
rather the timing of the birth of the providential child
vis-i-vis events in the Fertile Crescent.

Thus, in the final analysis, neither the Hebrew nor
Greek of Isaiah 7:14 refers to the virginal conception
about which Matthew writes; nor was there anything in
the Jewish understanding of the verse which would give
rise either to the idea of conception through the Holy
Spirit or to the Christian belief in the virginal conception
of Jesus. In the opinion of Jesuit scholar Raymond Brown,
an expert on the infancy narratives, at most, reflection on
Isaiah 7:14 colored the expression of an already existing
Christian belief in the virginal conception of Jesus
(Brown, The Birth of the Messiah, pp. 143-53).

Further analysis of the infancy narratives (Matt. 1-
2; Luke 1-2) and of Luke's genealogy (the latter thought to
have been inserted into the third chapter of the Gospel
when the first two chapters were composed) in relation to
the rest of the New Testament casts doubt on the his-
toricity of the virginal conception. The Messiah was
anticipated as the fulfillment of Jewish history. Neverthe-
less, there was no expectation of a virgin birth in Israel,
nor was there any indication in the New Testament
literature (outside of the infancy narratives) that anyone
was aware that Jesus was born without the agency of a
human father. The Gospels were preached for years with-
out any mention of the virginal conception, and it is never
touched upon in the writings of Paul.


42 4NOTESTO PAGES 278-397

The baptism of Jesus is the starting point of the
earliest preaching of the Church as seen in the Pauline
Epistles and Acts. Mark begins there and so does John,
following a brief introductory passage on the preexistence
of the Word. Matthew and Luke deal with Jesus' birth in
the infancy narratives, but do not mention his birth again
in their Gospels. If the infancy narratives (which were
probably composed after the narratives of Jesus’ ministry)
are taken as a foreword to the Gospels of Matthew and
Luke, then these Gospels are seen to also begin with the
baptism of Jesus.

Apart from their introductory placement, the events
ofthe infancy narratives seem disconnected from Matthew
and Luke and none of the characters in their writings
appears to have any knowledge of the miraculous circum-
stances of Jesus’ birth; even his sisters, brothers and mother
appear unaware of Jesus' virginal conception. Further-
more, Mark 3:21-31, especially Mark 3:20, 21, suggests
that they saw him more like themselves: "He went home
again, and once more such a crowd collected that they
could not even have a meal. When his relatives heard of
this, they set out to take charge of him, convinced he was
out ofhis mind" (JB). If they were aware of his miraculous
conception, it seems unlikely they would have thought his
behavior out of character with his mission.

There are no statements in the New Testament
indicating that Joseph was a foster father or a legal
guardian. When giving the Matthew genealogy, the old
Sinaitic Syriac version of the New Testament (an im-
portant Greek manuscript based on early source mate-
rial from the late second or early third century) says,
"...Jacob begat Joseph; Joseph to whom was betrothed
Mary the virgin, begat Jesus who is called the Messiah."
In the next section referring to Joseph (Matt. 1:18-25)
the Sinaitic Syriac version reads, "She will bear you
a son.. .and he took his wife and she bore a son and he
called his name Jesus." Shortly thereafter the same text
reads, "but knew her not until...," referring to the


NOTES TO PAGE 3 425

Matthew assertion that Joseph and Mary did not have sexual
relations until after she brought forth her firstborn son.
This has led some scholars to argue that this passage
in the Sinaitic Syriac text does indeed speak of a virginal
conception—an assertion which for some theologians is
not entirely convincing, especially in light of Matthew
13:55, 56 (KJV), which discloses Jesus to be the son of
Joseph: "Is not this the carpenter's son? is not his mother
called Mary? and his brethren, James, and Joses, and
Simon, and Judas? And his sisters, are they not all with us?"
A New Catholic Commentary on Holy Scripture notes that
regarding "the problem of the historicity of the [infancy]
stories in Matt.," which often have a legendary or 'apocry-
phal' nature, "it is impossible to be dogmatic" (Reginald C.
Fuller, ed. [London: Thomas Nelson, 1975], p. 907).

If Jesus were conceived by the normal means, there
still remains the question of why Joseph and Mary would
have had sexual relations prior to their marriage. Assum-
ing the accuracy of the report in Matthew that Mary was
with child after she and Joseph were betrothed but before
their marriage, prevailing customs of the day would not
make that such an unusual situation.

Betrothal at the time of Jesus legally effected a
marital relationship as attested to in both the Old Testa-
ment and the Talmud. It was sealed when the husband-to-
be paid the future bride's father or guardian a "bride price"
as compensation for his loss. Thereafter she was in his
power and considered him her "Baal," i.e., lord, master,
husband. The betrothal could only be repudiated by a bill
of divorce. Ifthe woman lay with another man it was con-
sidered adultery. If the man died the woman was consid-
ered a widow and subject to the levirate. Thus marriage
and betrothal carried similar rights and responsibilities.

"Within a short time after the betrothal covenant
was completed the boy had the privilege and obligation of
cohabitation with his spouse. In the case of the earliest
tradition pertaining to Hebrew marriage customs, there
appears to have been only a few days lapse between the


42 6 NOTES TO PAGES 278-397

betrothal transaction and the cohabitation. The girl re-
mained at the home of her father until the husband was
ready to receive her. At that time there was usually a
nuptial drinking party to celebrate the bride's transference
to the groom's home. Intimate relations by betrothed
couples were not prohibited in Jewish Scriptures. The
Mishnah and the Talmud indicate that Palestinian Juda-
ism showed considerable tolerance towards prenuptial
unions in the era of the New Testament, and children
conceived as a result were not stigmatized as illegitimate"
(William E. Phipps, Was Jesus Married? [New York:
Harper & Row, 1970], pp. 39-40).

A review of Hebrew attitudes toward procreation
may help to clarify the controversy over the virginal con-
ception. For some time prior to the birth of Jesus, the
Hebrews assumed that God was active in the generation of
each individual—that Yahweh creates when parents pro-
create—something that biblical scholar William E. Phipps
says might be called a theory of dual paternity: "This
double sonship outlook became established in Jewish
tradition. One ancient rabbi said that human creation
occurs in this manner: 'Neither man without woman nor
woman without man, and neither of them without the
Divine Spirit.’

"In the first birth account ofthe Bible, Eve exclaims:
‘T have brought a child into being with the help of YHWH..'
["I have gotten a man from the LORD."] This was inter-
preted by a rabbi: 'There are three partners in the produc-
tion ofa man: the Holy One, blessed be he, the father, and
the mother.’ In that talmudic assertion 'the rabbinic theory
of marital intercourse is summed up."

The concept of dual paternity, Phipps points out,
was not a uniquely Jewish idea. Confucius wrote: "The
female alone cannot procreate; the man alone cannot
propagate; and Heaven alone cannot produce a man. The
three collaborating, man is born. Hence anyone may be
called the son of his mother or the son of Heaven."

Phipps argues that the doctrine of the virginal


NOTES TO PAGE 3 427

conception, at least in Luke, depends upon two Greek
words in Luke 3 and four words in Luke 1 that were
probably added by a scribe who misunderstood the Hebrew
doctrine of dual paternity. Luke 3:23 contains an obvious
scribal insertion: "And Jesus himself began to be about
thirty years of age, being (as was supposed) the son of
Joseph, which was the son of Heli." Phipps declares that
the words "as was supposed" render irrelevant the aim that
the genealogical compiler had in mind, which was to trace
Jesus' descent through Joseph.

Luke 1:34 contains a less obvious scribal insertion.
"Then said Mary unto the angel, How shall this be,
seeing I know not a man?" The statement is incongruous
when the words "seeing I know not a man" remain in the
text. Phipps points out that an intelligent bride would
hardly be puzzled by the means by which she would
become pregnant. But if "seeing I know not a man" is
deleted, then Mary's puzzlement refers to the magnificent
destiny for a carpenter's son prophesied by Gabriel in the
preceding verses, not the method of fertilization. Some
scholars suggest that an old Latin version of this passage,
without reference to the virginal conception, may be the
way Luke wrote it (Ibid., pp. 40-42).

Considering this and other scribal insertions, Dr.
John C. Trever, head of the Dead Sea Scrolls Project at
Claremont, believes that it is not necessary to assume that
the author of the Gospel of Luke ever referred to the
virginal conception; it seems that Luke was doctored to
harmonize with Matthew. Trever concludes: "We might
say with considerable support that the Gospel of Matthew
may be the origin of the doctrine of virgin birth."

Phipps notes that there is no way to prove or disprove
that the original texts of Matthew and Luke were tampered
with, because the earliest existing manuscripts are several
centuries later than the lost originals. However, it was in
the second and third centuries that the virginal conception
became exalted among Gentile Christians as the only fit-
ting way for the Divine Logos to have become enfleshed


428 NOTES TO PAGES 278-397

(Ibid., p. 43). Today it is the position of the Roman Catholic
church, the Eastern Orthodox church, and the Coptic
church that Jesus was the product of a virginal conception.

It is important to draw a distinction between the
virginal conception and the virgin birth, which deals with
the way Jesus actually passed out of Mary's womb. Chris-
tian traditions of the second century hold that Jesus was
born miraculously, without pain to his mother and leav-
ing her physically intact.

As Raymond Brown points out, Matthew is con-
cerned only with showing Mary's virginity before Jesus’
birth so that the Isaiahan prophecy will be fulfilled. As
time passed, however, the notion of the virginal concep-
tion grew, and by the second century traditions of the
virgin birth developed, followed by the idea that Joseph
and Mary never had normal sexual relations, finally
concluding that Joseph, too, was a virgin!

Jesus' brothers and sisters are sometimes held to be
children of Joseph by a previous marriage. "In antiquity
there were debates whether these were half-brothers of
Jesus (sons of Joseph by a previous marriage— Protevan-
gelium of James; Epiphanius), or cousins (sons of either
Joseph's brother or of Mary's sister—Jerome), or blood
brothers (children of Joseph and Mary—Helvidius)" (Brown,
The Birth of the Messiah, p. 132).

This author does not believe that the conception of
Jesus by his father Joseph, as the agent of the Holy Spirit,
in any way detracts from the divinity of his soul or the
magnitude of the incarnate Word within him; rather does
it enhance the availability of the fullness of God through
his chosen and anointed human instruments. Sources:
John D. Davis, A Dictionary of the Bible, 4th rev. ed.
(Grand Rapids, Mich.: Baker Book House, 1954); Mat-
thew Black and H. H. Rowley, eds., Peake’s Commentary
on the Bible (Walton-on-Thames, Surrey: Nelson, 1962);
New Catholic Encyclopedia, s.v. "Genealogy," and
"Luke, Gospel According to St."; Isaac Asimov, Asimov's
Guide to the Bible—Volume Two: The New Testament


THE LOST YEARS OF JESUS 23

pope, world-famous French historian and critic
Ernest Renan, and a Cardinal Rotelli in Paris.”

The unnamed cardinal allegedly told Noto-
vitch he would only make a lot of enemies by
publishing his manuscript and said, "If it be a
question of money which interests you, I might ask
that a reward should be made to you for your notes,
which should indemnify you for the expenses you
have incurred and the time you have lost."

Cardinal Rotelli reportedly opposed the publi-
cation of Notovitch's work on the grounds that it
would aid the enemies of the "evangelical doctrine."

According to Notovitch, Renan, author of a
popular but extraordinarily controversial Life of
Jesus, asked him to entrust him with the manu-
script so that he could make a report to the
Academy. Notovitch said he declined to do so
because, flattering as that might be,

I foresaw that if I accepted this combina-
tion, I should only have the honor of having
discovered the chronicle, while the illustri-
ous author of the Vie de J4sus would gain all
the kudos through commenting upon it and
making it public.

Therefore, as I believed myself suffi-
ciently prepared to publish the translation of
the chronicle and to accompany it by my
notes, I declined the very kindly meant offer
thus made to me. Not however to hurt in
any way the susceptibility of the great mas-
ter, whom I deeply respected, I determined


NOTES TO PAGE 3 429

(New York: Avon, 1969); D. Guthrie and J. A. Motyer,
eds., The New Bible Commentary Revised, 3rd ed. (Grand
Rapids, Mich.: Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing Co., 1970);
Phipps, Was Jesus Married?; The Anchor Bible: Matthew
(Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday & Co., 1971); Fuller, A
New Catholic Commentary on Holy Scripture; Brown,
The Birth of the Messiah; and The Anchor Bible: The
Gospel According to Luke (I-IX) (Garden City, N.Y.:
Doubleday & Co., 1981); Telephone interview with Dr.
John Trever, 9 November 1984.

. For other views on the resurrection, see John Dart, The
Laughing Savior (New York: Harper & Row, 1976), pp.
104-6; Elaine Pagels, The Gnostic Gospels (New York:
Random House, 1979), pp. 3-27; The Secret Book of
John, in Willis Bamstone, ed., The Other Bible (New
York: Harper & Row, 1984), p. 53 (hereafter cited as
TOB); Basilides, in TOB, pp. 628, 634; The Sethian-
Ophites, in TOB, p. 664; and "Mani and Manichaeism,"
in TOB, p. 674.

. There was a tradition during the sub-apostolic age and the
second century ofa long interval between the resurrec-
tion and the ascension. Evidence ofit appears not only in
the writings of the eminent Church Father Irenaeus, who
held that Jesus suffered in his thirtieth year but taught
until he was forty or fifty years old, but also in a number
of Gnostic works which likewise deal with an extended
post-resurrection stay on earth.

The Apocryphon of James (c. second century)
states that after the resurrection Jesus appears to the
twelve disciples and they converse with him for 550 days.
Later Jesus ascends. (See The Apocryphon of James, in
TOB, pp. 343-49.) The Ascension of Isaiah, an apocry-
phal Christian apocalypse (composed in stages during the
first and second centuries), "predicts" after the fact,
as was often the case in pseudepigraphical works, that
Jesus "will arise on the third day and will remain in that
world 545 days; and then many of the righteous will
ascend with him, whose spirits do not receive their


430 NOTES TO PAGES 278-397

garments till the Lord Christ ascends and they ascend
with him." Later in this work Isaiah reports, "In Jerusa-
lem indeed I saw how he was crucified on the tree, and
how he was raised after three days and remained still
many days" (TOB, pp. 527, 530).

A Sethian-Ophite legend and Valentinian writings
mention that Jesus remained on earth for eighteen
months following the resurrection (see The Sethian-
Ophites, in TOB, p. 664; "Valentinius and the Valentinian
System of Ptolemaeus," TOB, p. 613). The discrepancy
in these dates may be an indication of the varying length
of time the writers or their sources actually saw Jesus
after his resurrection. Or the numbers may be an attempt
at their sense of a divine numerology; Francis Legge,
Forerunners and Rivals of Christianity, 2 vols. (New Hyde
Park, N.Y.: University Books, 1964), 2:61.

5. Irenaeus, Against Heresies 2.22.5, in Alexander Roberts
and James Donaldson, eds., The Ante-Nicene Fathers,
American reprint of the Edinburgh ed., 9 vols. (Grand
Rapids, Mich.: Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing Co., 1981),
vol. 1, The Apostolic Fathers with Justin Martyr and
Trenaeus, pp. 391-92.

6. G. R. S. Mead, trans., Pistis Sophia, rev. ed. (London:
John M. Watkins, 1921), p. 1.

7. David B. Barrett, ed., World Christian Encyclopedia
(Oxford and New York: Oxford University Press, 1982), p. 3.

8. W. D. Davies, Invitation to the New Testament (Garden
City, N.Y.: Doubleday & Co., 1966), pp. 78-79.

9. The New Testament provides no information about the
sojourn of the Holy Family in Egypt outside of Matthew
2:13-15, which says that Joseph "took the young child and
his mother by night, and departed into Egypt: And was
there until the death of Herod." Apocryphal writings and
Coptic Christian tradition, which are largely parallel,
point to numerous places where Jesus and his parents
went during their stay in Egypt. "Tradition records some
sites in Lower and Upper Egypt upon which churches
were built to commemorate this visit; some of these are


10.

NOTES TO PAGE 3 431

the monasteries of Wadi El Natrun, Mataria and the
monastery of Al Moharrak. But the most famous of these
sites is Babylon, the Roman fortress of Old Cairo. It
embraces within its walls the ancient church of ‘Abu
Sarga' (St. Sergius), built on a crypt, in which our Lord
dwelt during His sojourn in the ancient Jewish quarter in
Babylon. Tradition also says that the earlier church of the
crypt was built in the Apostolic age. To quote Butcher, ‘It
was the Jewish quarter of Babylon, and there is no reason
to doubt the tradition which brings Joseph and Mary to
settle there during the greater part of their stay in Egypt—
a period, the length of which is variously estimated by
Western and Eastern controversialists. Some reduce it to
six months, others extend it from two to four or even six
years"” (Hakim Ameen, "Saint Mark in Africa," in St.
Mark and the Coptic Church [Cairo: Coptic Orthodox
Patriarchate, 1968], p. 8).

A brochure distributed by the Egyptian Ministry of
Tourism, entitled "The Holy Family in Egypt," contains
a fuller list of churches that have been built on the sites
where the Holy Family are reported to have visited. The
Gospel of the Infancy of Jesus Christ, an apocryphal work
from about the second century, contains many of the
same elements embodied in the Coptic tradition. See
Gospel of the Infancy of Jesus Christ, in The Lost Books
of the Bible (Cleveland: Collins World, 1977) and E. L.
Butcher, The Story of the Church of Egypt 2 vols. (Lon-
don: Smith, Elder, & Co., 1847).

There are at least four separate and independent British
traditions that say Jesus traveled to Britain as a youth with
Joseph of Arimathea, who may have been his great-uncle.
By tradition, Joseph was in the tin trade and he brought
Jesus with him to Glastonbury and other nearby towns
while on business. At that time, there were forty Druidic
universities in Britain whose 60,000 students included
British nobility as well as sons of important men from all
over Europe. Glastonbury was a prominent center of
Druidism. According to Reverend C. C. Dobson, an


432 NOTES TO PAGES 278-397

expert on the Glastonbury traditions, Druid beliefs em-
bodied such concepts as the Trinity and foreshadowed the
coming of Christ.

Reverend Dobson does not think it unlikely that
Jesus studied Druidism. He writes: "May it not have been
that Our Lord, bringing with Him the Mosaic law, and
studying it in conjunction with the oral secrets of Druid-
ism, prepared to give forth His message, which occa-
sioned so much wonderment among the Jewish elders?

"In Britain He would be free from the tyranny of
Roman oppression, the superstition of Rabbinical mis-
interpretation, and the grossness of pagan idolatry, and its
bestial, immoral customs. In Druid Britain He would live
among people dominated by the highest and purest ideals,
the very ideals He had come to proclaim."

For the legends on Jesus at Glastonbury, see "Fol-
lowing the Grail" and "Did Jesus Go to High School in
Britain?" Heart: For the Coming Revolution, Winter 1985,
pp. 4-22, 112-15; C. C. Dobson, Did Our Lord Visit
Britain as They Say in Cornwall and Somerset? (London:
Covenant Publishing Co., 1974); Lionel Smithett Lewis,
St. Joseph of Arimathea at Glastonbury (Cambridge: James
Clarke & Co., 1955); George F. Jowett, The Drama of the
Lost Disciples (London: Covenant Publishing Co., 1980);
and E. Raymond Capt, The Traditions of Glastonbury
(Thousand Oaks, Calif.: Artisan Sales, 1983).

11. Ibid.; Dobson believes that Jesus may have come back to
Glastonbury when he was about 28 or 29 years of age,
just prior to his Palestinian mission. Since his age is not
specified in the Glastonbury traditions, Jesus may also
have gone to Britain with Joseph of Arimathea during the
lost years; The Arabic Gospel of the Infancy of the
Saviour, in The Ante-Nicene Fathers, vol. 8, Fathers of
the Third and Fourth Centuries: The Twelve Patriarchs,
Excerpts and Epistles, the Clementina, Apocrypha, Decre-
tals, Memoirs ofEdessa and Syriac Documents, Remains of
the First Ages, p. 415.

12. James M. Robinson, A New Quest of the Historical Jesus


13.

14.

NOTES TO PAGE 3 433

(Philadelphia: Fortress Press, 1983), p. 172.

Harvey K. McArthur, ed., In Search of the Historical
Jesus (New York: Charles Scribner's Sons, 1969), p. vii.

The first of these references appears in The Antiquities of
the Jews, written by the Jewish historian Flavius Josephus
in a.p. 93 or 94. Josephus records the death of "the
brother of Jesus, who was called Christ, whose name was
James" (Josephus, The Antiquities of the Jews 20.9.1), at
the hands of the high priest Annas—son of the better-
known Annas, also a high priest and father-in-law of
Caiaphas, whose deeds are recorded in John 18:13-24.

Another reference to Jesus in The Antiquities of the
Jews (18.3.3) is thought to be an embellishment of later
Christian writers in that it amounts to a confession of
faith—an unlikely occurrence from the pen of a Jew
anxious to please either the Romans or Jews, who were
both in conflict with Christianity at the time. But even
though the passage has almost certainly been altered, it
bears witness to Jesus’ historicity.

Tacitus, the aristocratic Roman historian, describes
Nero's persecution of Christians following the great fire of
Rome (a.p. 64) in his Annals published about a.p. 116.
A rumor was circulating that Nero had ordered the fire
started. "Hence, to suppress the rumor, he falsely charged
with the guilt, and punished with the most exquisite
tortures, the persons commonly called Christians, who
were hated for their enormities. Christus, the founder of
that name, was put to death as a criminal by Pontius
Pilate, procurator of Judea, in the reign of Tiberius..."
(Tacitus, Annals 15.44).

In a.pv. Ill, Pliny the Younger, a Roman states-
man, sent a now-famous letter to the Emperor Trajan
asking how he should deal with Christians who sing
"hymns to Christ, as to a god" (Pliny the Younger, Letters
10.97). Suetonius, another Roman historian, recorded
Claudius’ expulsion of the Jews from Rome after distur-
bances instigated by "Chrestus"—thought to be an obvious
corruption of Christus (Suetonius, Vita Claudii 25.4).


434 NOTES TO PAGES 278-397

15.

16.

17.
18.

19.
20.

21.
22.
23.
24.

Telephone interview with James A. Sanders, Professor of
Intertestamental and Biblical Studies, School of Theology
at Claremont, California, 7 September 1984.

Ibid.; James M. Robinson, ed., The Nag Hammadi
Library in English (New York: Harper & Row, 1977), pp.
ix, 1-25; Morton Smith, The Secret Gospel (New York:
Harper & Row, 1973); Elaine Pagels, The Gnostic Gos-
pels (New York: Random House, 1979), pp. xiii-xxxvi.
Some of the Gnostic gospels may be based on traditions
that predate the Gospels. The Gospel of Thomas, for
example, contains sayings of Jesus used in the Gospels
but in an older form. The fragment of the Secret Gospel
of Mark is included in a letter attributed to Clement of
Alexandria. The letter states that after the martyrdom of
Peter, Mark went to Alexandria where "he composed a
more spiritual Gospel for the use of those who were being
perfected" (Smith, The Secret Gospel, pp. 14-15). While
Professor Smith's discovery is highly controversial and
originally met with a good deal of skepticism, Birger A.
Pearson, Professor of Religious Studies at the University
of California at Santa Barbara, notes that "many scholars,
maybe even most, would now accept the authenticity of the
Clement fragment, including what it said about the Secret
Gospel of Mark" (Telephone interview, 4 September 1984).

Davies, Invitation to the New Testament, pp. 78-79.
Telephone interview with James M. Robinson, Professor
of Religion and Director of the Institute for Antiquity and
Christianity at the Claremont Graduate School, Clare-
mont, California, spring 1983.

Brown, The Birth of the Messiah, p. 538, n. 15.
Gospel of the Infancy of Jesus Christ 18:14, 16-17, in
The Lost Books of the Bible, p. 55; see Edgar Hennecke,
New Testament Apocrypha, 2 vols., ed. Wilhelm Schnee-
melcher (Philadelphia: Westminster Press, 1963).

Matt. 1, 2; Luke 1, 2

Luke 2:46-49.

Luke 2:51.

Luke 2:52.


25.

26.

27.

28.
29.

30.

31.

32.

33.

34,
35.

36.

37.

38.

39.
40.

41.

42.

NOTES TO PACES 11-27 435

Kenneth Scott Latourette, A History of Christianity—
Volume I: to A.D. 1500 (New York: Harper & Row, 1975),
p- 34.

Personal interview with Dr. John C. Trever, spring 1983.
Philip P. Wiener, ed., Dictionary of the History of Ideas
(New York: Charles Scribner's Sons, 1973), 2:470.
Robinson, telephone interview.

Catalogue Giniral de a _ Librairie Frangaise (Piriode de
1906 d 1909), s.v. "Notowitch (Nicolas)."

Edgar J. Goodspeed, Strange New Gospels (Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 1931), p. 10.

Encyclopaedia Judaica, s.v. “Notovich, Osip Konstantino-
vich"; Catalogue General de Ia Librairie Frangaise (Piriode
de 1891 a 1899), s.v. "Notowitch (O.K.)."

L. Austine Waddell, The Buddhism of Tibet (Cambridge:
W. Heffer & Sons, 1967), pp. 255-56.

Nicholas Notovitch, The Unknown Life of Jesus Christ,
trans. Virchand R. Gandhi (Chicago: Progressive Thinker
Publishing House, 1907), p. xv; Waddell, The Buddhism
of Tibet, p. 257.

Waddell, The Buddhism of Tibet, p. 282.

David L. Snellgrove and Tadeusz Skorupski, The Cultural
Heritage of Ladakh (Boulder, Colo.: Prajna Press, 1977),
p. 127.

Nicolas Notovitch, "Rdsum6," in The Unknown Life of
Jesus Christ, trans. Violet Crispe (London: Hutchinson
and Co., 1895), pp. 206, 208.

Goodspeed, Strange New Gospels, p. 11n; The National
Union Catalog, s.v. "Notovich, Nikolai."

"New Publications: The Life of Christ from Tibet," New
York Times, 19 May 1894, p. 3.

"Literary Notes," New York Times, 4 June 1894, p. 3.
Edward Everett Hale, "The Unknown Life of Christ,"
North American Review 158 (1894):594-601.

F. Max Moller, "The Alleged Sojourn of Christ in
India," Nineteenth Century, October 1894, pp. 515-21.
Notovitch's rebuttal quoted and summarized on pages 27-31
is taken from his preface and note "To the Publishers"


43 6 NOTES TO PAGES 278-397

43.
44,

45.

46.
47.

48.

49.

50.

51.

52.
53.

54.
55.
56.

57.

58.

originally published in The Unknown Life of Jesus Christ
and reprinted in this volume, pp. 100-120.

Miiller, "Alleged Sojourn of Christ in India," p. 521.
Leslie Brown, The Indian Christians of St. Thomas (Cam-
bridge: Cambridge University Press, 1982), p. 47.

The Catholic Encyclopedia, s.v. “Thomas, Saint."
Ibid.

Acts of the Holy Apostle Thomas, in The Ante-Nicene
Fathers, vol. 8, Fathers of the Third and Fourth Centuries,
pp. 535-49.

Consummation of Thomas the Apostle, in The Ante-
Nicene Fathers, vol. 8, Fathers of the Third and Fourth
Centuries, pp. 550-52.

The Catholic Encyclopedia, s.v. "Thomas, Saint."
"Hamis Knows Not issa,"' New York Times, 19 April
1896, p. 28.

J. Archibald Douglas, "The Chief Lama of Himis on the
Alleged 'Unknown Life of Christ,'" Nineteenth Century,
April 1896, pp. 667-77.

Ibid., pp. 677-78.

See Bruce M. Metzger, "Literary Forgeries and Canoni-
cal Pseudepigrapha," Journal of Biblical Literature 91,
no. 1 (March 1972):3-24.

Hale, "The Unknown Life of Christ," p. 594.

Miiller, "Alleged Sojourn of Christ in India," p. 516.
Snellgrove and Skorupski, The Cultural Heritage of Ladakh,
p. 127.

For biographical information on Swami Abhedananda,
see Sister Shivani, An Apostle of Monism (Calcutta:
Ramakrishna Vedanta Math, 1947); Ashutosh Ghosh,
Swami Abhedananda: The Patriot-Saint (Calcutta: Rama-
krishna Vedanta Math, 1967); Moni Bagchi, Swami
Abhedananda: A Spiritual Biography (Calcutta: Rama-
krishna Vedanta Math, 1968); and Swami Gambhira-
nanda, comp. and ed., The Apostles ofShri Ramakrishna
(Calcutta: Advaita Ashrama, 1982).

Swami Abhedananda's travel diary, In Kashmir and
Tibet, states that Abhedananda read Notovitch's Unknown


59.
60.
61.
62.
63.
64.

65.

66.
67.
68.
69.
70.
71.
72.

73.

74.

75.
76.

77.

78.

79.

80.

81.
82.

NOTES TO PACES 46-57) 437

Life of Jesus Christ while in America, but it does not
indicate whether or not he had ever read it previously (see
p- 254 of this volume).

Shivani, An Apostle of Monism, p. 199.

Ibid.

Ibid., p. 198; Bagchi, Swami Abhedananda, p. 409.
Gambhirananda, The Apostles of Shri Ramakrishna, p. 261.
Bagchi, Swami Abhedananda, p. 408.

Shivani, An Apostle of Monism, p. 198. Himis actually
lies 25 miles south of Leh, Ladakh.

Abhedananda, Kashmir O Tibbate, pp. 254-55 of this
volume.

Bagchi, Swami Abhedananda, pp. 400-401.
Abhedananda, Kashmir O Tibbate, p. 255 of this volume.
Bagchi, Swami Abhedananda, p. 401.

Ibid., p. 409; Shivani, An Apostle of Monism, p. 198.
Ghosh, Swami Abhedananda, p. 41.

Abhedananda, Kashmir O Tibbate, p. 261n of this volume.
J. Samuel Walker, Henry A. Wallace and American Foreign
Policy, Contributions in American History, no. 50 (West-
port, Conn, and London: Greenwood Press, 1976), p. 53.
Garabed Paelian, Nicholas Roerich (Agoura, Calif.: Aquar-
ian Educational Group, 1974), pp. 38-39.

George N. Roerich, Trails to Inmost Asia (New Haven,
Conn.: Yale University Press, 1931), pp. ix, x.

Ibid., p. xii.

Nicholas Roerich, Altai-Himalaya (New York: Frederick
A. Stokes Co., 1929), p. 122.

Paelian, Nicholas Roerich, p. 40.

Ibid., pp. 40-41.

Ibid. For another myth about underground dwellers, see
Edward Bulwer Lytton, VriZ: The Power of the Coming
Race (Blauvelt, N.Y.: Rudolf Steiner Publications, 1972).
"Book Reviews," American Magazine of Art 20, no. 12
(December 1929):719.

Roerich, Altai-Himalaya, p. xiii.

Nicholas Roerich, Heart of Asia (New York: Roerich
Museum Press, 1929), p. 22.


438 NOTES TO PAGES 278-397

83.
84.
85.

86.
87.
88.
89.
90.
91.
92.

93.

94.
95.

96.

97.

98.
99.

Roerich, Altai-Himalaya, p. 125.

Roerich, Heart of Asia, p. 30.

Frances R. Grant et al., Himalaya (New York: Brentano's,
1926), p. 148.

Ibid.

Roerich, Altai-Himalaya, pp. 118-19.

Grant et al., Himalaya, p. 172.

Roerich, Altai-Himalaya, p. 89.

Ibid., p. 120.

Grant et al., Himalaya, p. 153.

"Roerich's Far Quest for Beauty," Literary Digest 98,
no. 9 (1 September 1928):24.

Penelope Chetwode, Kulu (London: John Murray, 1972),
p. 154.

Goodspeed, Strange New Gospels, pp. 10-24.

Janet Bock, The Jesus Mystery (Los Angeles: Aura Books,
1980), p. 22.

For eyewitness accounts of the Chinese Communist take-
over of Tibet, see Tibet under Chinese Communist Rule
(Dharamsala: Information & Publicity Office of His Holi-
ness the Dalai Lama, 1976).

William O. Douglas, Beyond the High Himalayas (Gar-
den City, N.Y.: Doubleday & Co., 1952), p. 152.
Personal interview with Dr. Robert S. Ravicz, spring 1983.
Personal interview with Edward F. Noack, fall 1984.

Chapter Four LEGENDS OF THE EAST

1.

For biographical information on Nicholas Roerich, see
Christian Brinton, The Nicolas Roerich Exhibition (New
York: Redfield-Kendrick-Odell Co., 1920); Frances R.
Grant et al., Himalaya (New York: Brentano's, 1926);
Nicholas Roerich, Altai-Himalaya (New York: Frederick
A. Stokes Company, 1929); Nicholas Roerich, Heart of
Asia (New York: Roerich Museum Press, 1929); George
N. Roerich, Trails to Inmost Asia (New Haven, Conn.:
Yale University Press, 1931); Nicholas Roerich (New York:
Nicholas Roerich Museum, 1964); Penelope Chetwode,
Kulu. (London: John Murray, 1972); Nicholas Roerich


J 28 ELIZABETH CLARE PROPHET CHAPTER ONE

to await his demise, which sad occurrence
I foresaw—judging from his enfeebled con-
dition—could not be far off.

These explanations served only to erode what
little credibility Notovitch might have had with
Miiller. The Oxford professor wrote: "When a
Cardinal at Rome dissuades him from publishing
his book, and also kindly offers to assist him, he
hints that this was simply a bribe, and that the
Cardinal wished to suppress the book. Why should
he?" This did not make sense to Miiller. "If the
story of Issa were historically true, it would remove
many difficulties. It would show once for all that
Jesus was a real and historical character."

Moreover, Miiller found Notovitch's strategy
of waiting for Renan's death—to insure the better
part of the glory for his discovery—to be unchari-
table, to say the least. In the final analysis, how-
ever, Miiller said that he preferred to suppose the
Russian was duped because "it is pleasanter to
believe that Buddhist monks can at times be wags,
than that M. Notovitch is a rogue."

Miiller ends the article with a P.S. containing
a letter from an unnamed English lady dated Leh,
Ladakh, June 29 [1894]: "Did you hear ofa Russian
who could not gain admittance to the monastery in
any way, but at last broke his leg outside, and was
taken in? His object was to copy a Buddhist Life of
Christ which is there. He says he got it, and has
published it since in French. There is not a single
word of truth in the whole story! There has been no


ol

10.

11.

12.

13.

14.
15.

16.
17.
18.
19.
20.

21.
22.
23.

NOTES TO PACES 266-277 439

(New York: Nicholas Roerich Museum, 1974); Garabed
Paelian, Nicholas Roerich (Agoura, Calif.: Aquarian Edu-
cational Group, 1974).

Helena Roerich, Foundations of Buddhism (New York:
Agni Yoga Society, 1971), Preface.

. J. Samuel Walker, Henry A. Wallace and American

Foreign Policy, Contributions in American History,
no. 50 (Westport, Conn, and London: Greenwood Press,
1976), p. 62, n. 25.

Grant ct al., Himalaya, p. 48.

. Chetwode, Kulu, p. 151.

"Nicholas K. Roerich," American Magazine of Art 12,
no. 6 (June 1921):200.

. Nicholas Roerich (New York: Nicholas Roerich Museum,

1974), pp. 7, 8.

Roerich, Altai-Himalaya, p. xv.

Walker, Henry A. Wallace, p. 54.

Leonid Andreyev, "The Realm of Roerich," New Repub-
lic 29, no. 368 (21 December 1921):97.

Grant etal., Himalaya, pp. 66, 68.

Nikolai Rerikh, Zazhigaite serdtsa. [Set hearts aflame]
comp. I. M. Bogdanova-Rerikh (Moscow: Izdatel'stvo
"Molodaia gvardia," 1978), p. 22.

Paelian, Nicholas Roerich, p. 36; Robert C. Williams,
Russian Art and American Money (Cambridge, Mass.
and London: Harvard University Press, 1980), p. 117.
Williams, Russian Art and American Money, p. 119.
See The Roerich Pact and The Banner of Peace (New York:
The Roerich Pact and Banner of Peace Committee, 1947).
Walker, Henry A. Wallace, pp. 53-57.

Paelian, Nicholas Roerich, pp. 39-40.

Ibid., p. 28.

Ibid., p. 29.

Nicholas Roerich, Shambhala (New York: Nicholas Roerich
Museum, 1978), pp. 304, 307.

Roerich, Heart of Asia, pp. 7-8.

Roerich, Altai-Himalaya, pp. vii-viii.

Ibid., pp. vi, vii.


440

24.
25.
26.
27.
28.
29.
30.
31.
32.
33.
34.
35.
36.
37.
38.
39.
40.
41.
42.
43.

NOTES TO PAGES 278-397

Roerich, Trails to Inmost Asia, p. xii.
Ibid., p. 5.

Roerich, Altai-Himalaya, p. 100.

Roerich, Heart of Asia, pp. 23, 24, 26-28.
Roerich, Trails to Inmost Asia, p. 20.
Grant et al., Himalaya, pp. 170-72.
Roerich, Altai-Himalaya, p. 114.

Roerich, Heart of Asia, pp. 30, 28-29.
Ibid., pp. 29-30.

Roerich, Altai-Himalaya, pp. 118-19, 120.
Ibid., pp. 120-21, 122-23, 124.

Ibid., pp. 125-26.

Ibid., pp. 131, 134.

Grant et al., Himalaya, p. 148.

Roerich, Altai-Himalaya, pp. 89-90.
Ibid., p. 90; Grant et al., Himalaya, p. 148.
Grant et al., Himalaya, pp. 148-53.
Roerich, Altai-Himalaya, p. 93.

Grant etal., Himalaya, pp. 153-56.
Roerich, Altai-Himalaya, pp. 94-96, 97-98.

Chapter Seven EPILOGUE

1. The Notovitch version of the Issa manuscript contains

passages (The Life of Saint Issa V:12-21, 26, pp. 220-222
of this volume) which indicate that Jesus rejected the
Vedas and the Hindu '‘idols'. Inasmuch as Jesus’ closest
disciple, John, begins his Gospel with a quote from the
Vedas, the authenticity of these passages may be ques-
tioned. As Sir John Woodroofe notes: "The fourth Gospel
opens grandly, 'In the beginning was the Word, and the
Word was with God, and the Word was God.' These are
the very words of Veda. Prajapatir vai idam asit: In the
beginning was Brahman. Tasya vag dvitiya asit; with
whom was Vak or the Word... Vag vai paramam Brahma;
and the word is Brahman" (The Garland of Letters, 7th
ed. [Pondicherry: Ganesh & Co., 1979], p. 4).

Notovitch embraced the Russian Orthodox religion.
In the conclusion to his book (not published in this


NOTES TO PAGE 397. 441

volume) he says of Jesus, "In his sermons not only did he
deprecate the deprival of a man's rights to be considered as
such, while apes or pieces of marble or metal were
worshipped, but he attacked the very principle of Brah-
manism, its system of gods, its doctrine, and its Trimurti
(Trinity), the stumbling block of this religion." In a
similar vein he declares, "Jesus denied the existence of all
these absurd hierarchical gods, who obscure the great
principle of monotheism" (Nicolas Notovitch, "Risumd,"
in The Unknown Life of Jesus Christ, trans. Violet Crispe
[London: Hutchinson and Co., 1895], pp. 227, 230).

Both observations are incongruous with a passage of
The Life of Saint Issa (V:4, 5) in which Jesus diligently
studies and then teaches the Vedas. Therefore, the reader
ought to consider the possibility that the verses which
denounce the Vedas may have been inserted by Notovitch
himself—taking into account the fact that according to
his own testimony he collected the verses that make up
The Life of Saint Issa from more than one volume and
then arranged them in chronological order (see p. 106 of
this work)—so that Christians might not be tempted to
seek sources of spiritual comfort and enlightenment out-
side their own doctrine and scripture.

We have no proof whatsoever for this conjecture,
only the appreciation of Jesus' vast mind and his ability to
comprehend Trimurti (Brahma, Vishnu, and Shiva) and
the many manifestations of the one God as consistent
with and originating in the Law of the One—"Hear, O
Israel: The torp our God is one torp" (Deut. 6:4)—and
with his teaching of the Trinity, his identification of the
Father and the Holy Spirit as Persons, and himself exem-
plifying the Son as a Person—thereby completing our own
comprehension of the Great Three-in-One. (Note that the
Abhedananda version of the Himis manuscript does not
include the denunciation of the Vedas.)

. Charles Francis Potter, The Lost Years of Jesus Revealed,
rev. ed. (Greenwich, Conn.: A Fawcett Gold Medal Book,
1962), p. 10. There is some disagreement about the


442 NOTES TO PAGES 278-397

accuracy of Potter's use of the word zeugos—especially
since scholars do not know of a current Greek word for
yoga, much less one in use two millennia ago. Since both
yoga and yoke are derived from the same Proto-Indo-
European root word yeug (which connects the Sanskrit
yuga/ydke with the Greek zugonlyoke, and the Sanskrit
yoga/union with the Greek zeugma/bond), his use of the
word seems reasonable.

Since most people in Palestine spoke Greek as well
as Aramaic, biblical scholars now generally agree that
Jesus spoke Greek. There are no records available to tell us
in what language Jesus originally spoke this phrase. But if
he spoke it in Greek, it would be most illumining to find
out what word he actually used.

The meaning of yoga (Sanskrit, literally "yoking,"
"union," "disciplined activity") implies the necessity of a
path of chelaship—i.e., a path of youg (i.e., union with
God)—in order to fulfill the responsibility of discipleship
and Christhood. As it is used here, yoga means "my way,"
"my path,” or "my dharma." Thus, in this context, yoke/
yoga means the mantle and authority of the Teacher
and his "teaching." "Burden" entertains the principle of
"karma"—"For every man shall bear his own burden"
(Gal. 6:5). The dharma of the Lord is his teaching. The
karmic burden of the Lord is the world karma or sin he
bore for our sakes; for he himself is a karma-free being.
Thus, Jesus was beckoning his disciples, or would-be dis-
ciples, to "follow my path," i.e., "my disciplined activity."
When he declares, "My yoga is easy," he is saying: My
path is the best or simplest, most direct way. Out of all
paths of the avatars, I have synthesized for you the one true
way that will lead to your union with God. (See "the
burden of the Lorpb" [Jer. 23:33-40].)

3. Matt. 14:22-33; Mark 6:45-51; John 6:15-21; Luke 4:28-
30; John 8:59; Matt. 28:9, 10, 16-18; Mark 16:9-14, 19;
Luke 24:13-53; John 20:11-29; 21:1-14; Acts 1:3,9-11;The
Acts of Barnabas, in Alexander Roberts and James Donald-
son, eds., The Ante-Nicene Fathers, American reprint of


NQF

NOTES TO PAGES 399-409 443

the Edinburgh ed., 9 vols. (Grand Rapids, Mich.: Wm. B.
Eerdmans Publishing Co., 1981), vol. 8, Fathers of the
Third and Fourth Centuries: The Twelve Patriarchs, Ex-
cerpts and Epistles, the Clementina, Apocrypha, Decre-
tals, Memoirs of Edessa and Syriac Documents, Remains
of the First Ages, p. 493 (hereafter cited as ANF); The Acts
of Philip, in ANF, pp. 499, 501, 505-6, 509; Acts of
Andrew and Matthias, in ANF, pp. 517-25; Acts of Peter
and Andrew, in ANF, pp. 526, 527; Acts and Martyrdom
of St. Matthew the Apostle, in ANF, pp. 528-29; Acts of
the Holy Apostle Thomas, in ANF, pp. 535, 537, 542;
The Secret Book of John, in Willis Barnstone, ed., The
Other Bible (San Francisco: Harper & Row, 1984), pp. 53,
61 (hereafter cited as TOB); The Gospel of the Hebrews,
in TOB, p. 335; The Apocryphon of James, in TOB, pp.
345, 349; The Gospel of Bartholomew, in TOB, pp. 351-
55, 357-58; The Acts of John, in TOB, pp. 418-19, 420;
The Acts of Peter, in TOB, p. 433; G. R. S. Mead, trans.,
Pistis Sophia, rev. ed. (London: John M. Watkins, 1921),
pp- 4, 5. See also note 7.

John 2:1-11.

. John 14:26; 15:26; 16:7-16.

John 7:14-16.

Acts 9:1-20; 22:6-21; 26:12-18; 18:9, 10; 10:9-16; 23:11;
II Tim. 4:17; Acts of the Holy Apostles Peter and Paul, in
ANF, pp. 484-85.

Matt. 24:28.

CREDITS

BR

CS ANaAnaRwoN

Heb. 5:12-14.

Matt. 10:26; Mark 4:22; Luke 12:2; I Cor. 2:7-10.
II Cor. 6:2.

Phil. 2:5-8.

. Matt. 20:25-28; 23:11; Mark 9:35; Luke 22:26, 27.

Il Tim. 2:15.
John 1:14; 17:24.
John 10:16.
Luke 2:46, 47.


444

10.
11.
12.

13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
25.
26.
27.
28.
29.
30.
31.
32.
33.

NOTES TO PAGES 278-397

The Life of Saint Issa V:6-27; VI:15,16; VIL1-12; VIII:1-22.
Matt. 21:12.

The long-lost continent of Lemuria which sank beneath
the Pacific more than 12,000 years ago in a cataclysm of
fire. The Motherland is said to be the origin of the
doctrines and scriptures of ancient Hinduism. See James
Churchwards books: The Children of Mu, The Cosmic
Forces ofMu, The Lost Continent ofMu, The Sacred Sym-
bols of Mu, and The Second Book of the Cosmic Forces of
Mu, all published in New York by Paperback Library, 1968.
John 14:16-20, 25, 26.

John 14:12.

Jer. 31:33; Heb. 8:10.

I Cor. 13:12; I John 3:2.

II Tim. 3:7.

John 15:15.

Rom. 8:17; Gal. 4:7.

John 1:1-3; I John 1:1; 2:13; John 8:58.

Mai. 4:2.

II Pet. 1:19.

Exod. 3:14.

Mark 14:36.

Dan. 12:1.

I John 4:4.

John 18:38.

Isa. 61:2; 63:4.

Matt. 10:6; 15:24; 18:11; Luke 19:10.

Matt. 9:37, 38; Luke 10:2; John 4:35.

Heb. 4:12; Eph. 6:17; Rev. 1:16.

Rev. 19:11-21.

Matt. 5:13; Isa. 13:12.


Bibliography

Abercrombie, Thomas J. "“Ladakh—The Last Shangri-la."
National Geographic 153 (1978):332-59.

Ahluwalia, H. P. S. Hermit Kingdom: Ladakh. New Delhi:
Vikas Publishing House, 1980.

Andreyev, Leonid. "The Realm of Roerich." New Republic, 21
December 1921, pp. 97-99.

Bagchi, Moni. Swami Abhedananda: A_ Spiritual Biography.
Calcutta: Ramakrishna Vedanta Math, 1968.

Barnstone, Willis. The Other Bible. New York: Harper & Row,
1984.

Bhavnani, Enakshi. "A Journey to ‘Little Tibet.'" National
Geographic 99 (1951):603-34.

Bock, Janet. The Jesus Mystery: Of Lost Years and Unknown
Travels. Los Angeles: Aura Books, 1980.

Brinton, Christian. The Nicholas Roerich Exhibition: With
Introduction and Catalogue of the Paintings by Christian
Brinton. New York: Redfield-Kendrick-Odell Co., 1920.

Brown, Leslie. The Indian Christians of St. Thomas: An
Account of the Ancient Syrian Church of Malabar. Cam-
bridge: Cambridge University Press, 1982.

Brown, Raymond E. The Birth of the Messiah: A Commentary
on the Infancy Narratives in Matthew and Luke. Garden
City, N.Y.: Doubleday & Co., 1977.

Chetwode, Penelope. Kulu: The End of the Habitable World.
London: John Murray, 1972.

Douglas, J. Archibald. "The Chief Lama of Himis on the
Alleged ‘Unknown Life of Christ.'" Nineteenth Century,
April 1896, pp. 667-78.

Douglas, William O. Beyond the High Himalayas. Garden
City, N.Y.: Doubleday & Co., 1952.


446 BIBLIOGRAPHY

Gambhirananda, Swami, comp. and ed. The Apostles ofShri
Ramakrishna. Calcutta: Advaita Ashrama, 1982.

Ghosh, Ashutosh. Swami Abhedananda: The  Patriot-Saint.
Calcutta: Ramakrishna Vedanta Math, 1967.

Goodspeed, Edgar J. Strange New Gospels. Chicago: Univer-
sity of Chicago Press, 1931.

Grant, Frances R.; Siegrist, Mary; Grebenstchikoff, George;
Narodny, Ivan; and Roerich, Nicholas. Himalaya: A
Monograph. New York: Brentano's, 1926.

Hale, Edward Everett. "The Unknown Life of Christ." North
American Review 158 (1894):594-601.

"Hamis Knows Not 'Issa': Clear Proof That Notovitch Is a
Romancer." New York Times, 19 April 1896, p. 28.
Hassnain, F. M.; Oki, Masato; and Sumi, Tokan D. Ladakh:
The Moonland. 2d rev. ed. New Delhi: Light & Life

Publishers, 1977.

Hennecke, Edgar. New Testament Apocrypha. 2 vols. Edited
by Wilhelm Schneemelcher. Philadelphia: Westminster
Press, 1963.

Lauf, Detlef Ingo. Tibetan Sacred Art: The Heritage ofTantra.
Berkeley & London: Shambhala, 1976.

"Literary Notes." New York Times, 4 June 1894, p. 3.

Miiller, F. Max. "The Alleged Sojourn of Christ in India."
Nineteenth Century, October 1894, pp. 515-21.

"New Publications: The Life of Christ from Tibet." New York
Times, 19 May 1894, p. 3.

"Nicholas K. Roerich." American Magazine of Art 12 (1921):
198-200.

Nicholas Roerich. New York: Nicholas Roerich Museum, 1964.

Nicholas Roerich. New York: Nicholas Roerich Museum, 1974.

Paelian, Garabed. Nicholas Roerich. Agoura, Calif.: Aquarian
Educational Group, 1974.

Pagels, Elaine. The Gnostic Gospels. New York: Random
House, 1979.

Phipps, William E. Was Jesus Married? The Distortion of
Sexuality in the Christian Tradition. New York: Harper &
Row, 1970.

Robinson, James M. The Nag Hammadi Library in English.
New York: Harper & Row, 1977.


BIBLIOGRAPHY = 447

Roerich, George N. Trails to Inmost Asia: Five Years of
Exploration with the Roerich Central Asian Expedition.
New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press, 1931.

Roerich, Nicholas. Altai-Himalaya: A Travel Diary. New York:
Frederick A. Stokes Co., 1929.

Heart of Asia. New York: Roerich Museum Press,
1929.

Shambhala. New York: Nicholas Roerich Museum,
1978.

The Roerich Pact and The Banner of Peace. New York: The
Roerich Pact and Banner of Peace Committee, 1947.
"Roerich's Far Quest for Beauty." Literary Digest, 1 September

1928, pp. 24-25.

Shivani, Sister (Mrs. Mary LePage). An Apostle of Monism:
An Authentic Account of the Activities of Swami Abheda-
nanda in America. Calcutta: Ramakrishna Vedanta Math,
1947.

Smith, Morton. The Secret Gospel: The Discovery and Inter-
pretation of the Secret Gospel According to Mark. New
York: Harper & Row, 1973.

Clement of Alexandria and a_ Secret Gospel of Mark.
Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1973.
Snellgrove, David L., and Skorupski, Tadeusz. The Cultural
Heritage of Ladakh—Volume One: ~~ Central Ladakh.

Boulder, Colo.: Prajna Press, 1977.

Tibet under Chinese Communist Rule: A Compilation of
Refugee Statements 1958-1975. Dharamsala: Informa-
tion & Publicity Office of His Holiness the Dalai Lama,
1976.

Waddell, L. Austine. The Buddhism of Tibet or Lamaism: With
Its Mystic Cults, Symbolism and Mythology, and in Its
Relation to Indian Buddhism. Cambridge: W. HefFer &
Sons, 1967.

Walker, J. Samuel. Henry A. Wallace and American Foreign
Policy. Contributions in American History, no. 50. West-
port, Conn, and London: Greenwood Press, 1976.

Williams, Robert C. Russian Art and American Money: 1900-
1940. Cambridge, Mass. and London: Harvard University
Press, 1980.


THE LOST YEARS OF JESUS 2 3

Russian there. No one has been taken into the
Seminary for the past fifty years with a broken leg!
There is no Life of Christ there at all!""

Notovitch described Miiller's critique as an
"attempt to demolish me" but did not shrink from
the controversy. Instead, he vigorously defended
himself against his detractors. In a note "To the
Publishers" of one of his English editions, repro-
duced in this volume, he acknowledged that "a
skillfully devised criticism" had prejudiced the
public against the book and he briefly answered the
major criticisms.

First he tried to explain why the lama at
Himis, when later asked to verify the existence of
the manuscripts, refused to do so. Orientals, he
claimed, tend to see Westerners as robbers and
would interpret inquiries about a manuscript tanta-
mount to an admission that they wished to carry
it off. His own success in the matter was the result
of his use of "Eastern diplomacy"—an indirect
approach which veiled his real interests and allayed
their fears.

In response to the allegations that he had
never been to Himis, Notovitch provided the
names of various people who could verify his
presence in the region, including Dr. Karl Marx
(yes, that is his real name), a European physician
employed by the British government who treated
Notovitch in Ladakh.

To those who claimed he authored The Life of
Saint Issa, he protested, "My imagination is not so
fertile."


* Nicholas Roerich quoted the same verses
in a 1929 travel diary of his Asian
expedition.

* And in 1939, a beaming lama at
Himis presented a set of parchments
to Elisabeth Caspari with the words:

These books say your Jesus was here!”

Now you can read the controversial stories
of these travelers together with the original Bud-
dhist scriptures on the most important events
that shaped the life and work of the Saviour
Jesus Christ.

A historical breakthrough that will shake
the foundations of modern Christendom!


J30 ELIZABETH CLARE PROPHET CHAPTER ONE

Since Max Miiller had a reputation in the
scientific world, Notovitch spent even more time
addressing his arguments. The Russian journalist
acknowledged that the manuscripts he claimed to
have found were not listed in either the Tanjur or
Kanjur and if they were, "my discovery would be
neither a curious nor a rare one." Any Orientalist
could then have gone to Tibet and, aided by the
catalogues, found the relevant passages.

In his defense, Notovitch offered two reasons
why the manuscripts were not in these catalogues.
First, the catalogues were incomplete. Notovitch
said there were more than one hundred thousand
scrolls at the monastery at Lhasa, while "according
to Mr. Max Miiller's own statement, these tables
contain a list of about two thousand volumes only."
(Notovitch's rebuttal did not perfectly restate
Miiller's argument on this point, but he was essen-
tially correct—the Tanjur and Kanjur list only a
small portion of Buddhist literature.) Notovitch
also pointed out that the verses he published in his
book were not likely to be found in any catalogue
since they were "scattered through more than one
book without any title."

In answer to Miiller's charge that it would be
difficult for Jewish merchants to find just the peo-
ple who had known Issa as a student in India,
Notovitch replied that they were not Jewish but
Indian merchants who happened to witness the
crucifixion prior to returning home from Palestine.

Although he did not mention it, Notovitch
could have pointed out that there was yet another


THE LOST YEARS OF JESUS 2 3

reason why the connection between the merchants
returning from Palestine and those who had known
Jesus in India was not so difficult or unlikely: India
has a very efficient human grapevine. If Jesus had
made as much ofa stir in India as the text suggests,
it is not improbable that people throughout the
whole of India might have known of him. Further-
more, there is no reason to assume that Jesus, in his
fifteen or so years in India, would have made any
less of an impact than he did in his final three or so
years in Palestine. After all, based solely on those
three years his name and fame have been passed to
the nations of the world by the planetary grapevine.

During the course of his defense, Notovitch
said that the verses communicated to him by the
lama at Himis "may have been actually spoken by
St. Thomas—historical sketches traced by his own
hand or under his direction." He offered no proof
for that statement nor gave any indication of how it
could be reconciled with his assertion that the texts
were derived from the eyewitness reports of Indian
merchants. He simply observed that Saint Thomas,
Saint Bartholomew, and Saint Matthias professed
to have preached the gospel in Tibet, India, and
China and asked rhetorically if they had written
nothing.

Not much ofa certainty is known about Saint
Thomas. But according to universal tradition,
Christianity was first introduced into India by
Thomas in AD. 52. The Syrian Christians of
Malabar, India, claim that Saint Thomas was their
founder. And in his study The Indian Christians of


J 32 ELIZABETH CLARE PROPHET CHAPTER ONE

St. Thomas: An Account of the Ancient Syrian
Church of Malabar, Leslie Brown points out that
"there was a considerable Jewish colony in north-
western India in the first century, which might
have attracted the attention of the first Christian
missionaries.'"*4

Whether or not Saint Thomas actually wrote
anything, as noted in The Catholic Encyclopedia,
"his name is the starting-point of a considerable
apocryphal literature, and there are also certain
historical data which suggest that some of this
apocryphal material may contain germs of truth."

The Acta Thomae—the Acts of Thomas—an
early manuscript (pre-A.D. 220) bearing signs of
Gnostic origin, is the principal document con-
cerning him. The story contained therein is,
according to The Catholic Encyclopedia, “utterly
extravagant” in many of its particulars.*

In brief, the Acts of Thomas tells how the
apostles, when they were in Jerusalem, divided the
world by lot prior to going forth to preach the gospel.
India fell to Thomas, who declared he could not go:
"How can I, being an Hebrew man, go among the
Indians to proclaim the truth?"

Jesus appeared to Thomas and said, "Fear not,
Thomas; go away to India and proclaim the word,
for my grace shall be with thee." Thomas still
refused to go. So it happened that Abbanes, a
merchant, had been sent by the Indian king
Gundaphoros to buy a carpenter and bring him
back to India. Jesus saw Abbanes in the market,
approached him, and, according to the story, in


THE LOST YEARS OF JESUS 2 3

order to achieve his ordained purpose for his be-
loved disciple, sold Thomas into slavery to serve
Gundaphoros. Thomas then sailed with Abbanes
to India where the king gave him money to build a
palace. Instead, he spent the money on the poor
and preached in Christ's name.

Hearing of this, Gundaphoros had Thomas
imprisoned. Later the king discovered that the
disciple had actually built him a palace in the
heavens, whereupon he was converted and freed
Thomas."” Thereafter, Thomas traveled throughout
India, preaching and meeting with strange adven-
tures, and was eventually condemned to death and
pierced with spears by four soldiers.*

Despite what may seem to be the fanciful
nature of the tale, The Catholic Encyclopedia notes:

Now it is certainly a remarkable fact that
about the year A.D. 46 a king was reigning
over that part of Asia south of the Himalayas
now represented by Afghanistan, Baluchi-
stan, the Punjab, and Sind, who bore the
name Gondophernes or Guduphara. This we
know both from the discovery of coins, some
of the Parthian type with Greek legends,
others of the Indian type with legends in
an Indian dialect in Kharoshthi characters.
Despite sundry minor variations the identity
of the name with the Gundafor of the "Acta
Thomae" is unmistakable and is hardly dis-
puted. Further we have the evidence of the
Takht-i-Bahi inscription, which is dated,


J 34 ELIZABETH CLARE PROPHET CHAPTER ONE

and which the best specialists accept as
establishing that the King Guduphara proba-
bly began to reign about A. D. 20 and was still
reigning in 46.*°

But whether Saint Thomas went to India to
preach the gospel and helped write the text Noto-
vitch claimed to have discovered, or the story was
written in Pali from the account of Indian eyewit-
nesses, or the text appeared in either the Tanjur or
Kanjur, or even whether Notovitch broke his leg is
really beside the point. The issue, as Notovitch
declared in his note "To the Publishers," is this:
"Did those passages exist in the monastery of
Himis, and have I faithfully reproduced their sub-
stance?”

The New York Times, April 19, 1896, took
note of Notovitch's "bold and vigorous defense,"
which, "while it did not convince his critics, more
or less silenced them.">° Ladakh, it noted, was far
away and not easy to get to.

It was not the purpose of that Times article to
praise Notovitch, but to bury him. It mentioned
the story of one J. Archibald Douglas who accepted
the Russian journalist's challenge, went to Himis,
and then published an account of his journey in
the Nineteenth Century, which in the words of the
Times was "a complete refutation of every assertion
made by the Russian traveler, except the assertion
that he did make a journey into Little Tibet."

While a professor at Government College in
Agra, India, Douglas had become acquainted with


THE LOST YEARS OF JESUS 2 3

the controversy and had read Miiller's review arti-
cle before having had the opportunity to read
Notovitch's Unknown Life of Jesus Christ. That,
incidentally, is just about all we know about
Mr. Douglas.

As every detective knows, most criminals
have a discernible method of operation, a repeti-
tive pattern of behavior which tends to indicate
their future course of action. It seems this mystery
has a repetitive pattern of behavior of its own—and
an ironic one at that: key figures in the drama leave
no biographical traces. After a long and thorough
search, all we know about Douglas is that he wrote
an article for the Nineteenth Century, corre-
sponded with Max Miiller, and claimed to have
gone to Himis. Period.

To continue, Douglas thought that in declar-
ing the work to be a literary forgery, Miiller had
treated Notovitch harshly on inconclusive evidence.
Impressed by the Russian's staunch self-defense,
Douglas went to Himis in 1895, "fully prepared to
find that M. Notovitch's narrative was correct, and
to congratulate him on his marvellous discovery."

In his review article, "The Chief Lama of
Himis on the Alleged 'Unknown Life of Christ,'"5!
written in June of 1895, published in April of
1896, Douglas claimed that he was received by the
chief lama and, through the services of an able
interpreter, read to him sections of Notovitch's
book. Then he asked the chief lama a series of
questions based on those excerpts.


J 36 ELIZABETH CLARE PROPHET CHAPTER ONE

Douglas affirmed that he had "the fullest
confidence in the veracity and honesty of this old
and respected Chief Lama," that the lama under-
stood the passages from Notovitch's book, which
were translated slowly, and that the questions and
answers were discussed during two lengthy inter-
views before a final document was prepared for
signing.

Douglas then published the text of his ques-
tions and answers. According to the professor's
story, his host at Himis said that he had been chief
lama at the monastery for fifteen years—a span that
would have encompassed Notovitch's visit. The
lama said that during that time no European with a
broken leg had sought refuge at Himis, although
he distinctly remembered that several European
gentlemen had visited the monastery. Further-
more, he had not shown a book on the life of Saint
Issa to any "sahib."

"There is no such book in the monastery, and
during my term of office no sahib has been allowed
to copy or translate any of the manuscripts in the
monastery," Douglas documented the lama as
saying.

When asked if he was aware of any book in
the Buddhist monasteries of Tibet which had a
bearing on the life of Issa, he replied:

I have been for forty-two years a Lama, and
am well acquainted with all the well-known
Buddhist books and manuscripts, and I have


THE LOST YEARS OF JESUS 2 3

never heard of one which mentions the
name of Issa, and it is my firm and honest
belief that none such exists. I have inquired
of our principal Lamas in other monasteries
of Tibet, and they are not acquainted with
any books or manuscripts which mention
the name of Issa.

The lama, if we can believe Douglas’ story,
also assured him that he never received presents of
a watch, an alarm clock, or thermometer from
anyone (he did not know what a thermometer was
and was sure he did not possess one), did not speak
English or Urdu as Notovitch claimed, knew of no
Buddhist writings in Pali (the only writings at
Himis had been translated from Sanskrit and
Hindi into Tibetan), and said that the Buddhists
"know nothing even of his [Issa's] name; none of
the Lamas has ever heard it, save through mission-
aries and European sources."

According to the article, on June 3, 1895, the
chief lama of Himis signed a document contain-
ing these questions and answers and affixed his
official seal in the presence of Douglas and his
translator, Shahmwell Joldan, the former postmaster
of Ladakh.

At that point Douglas asserted that he had met
the criteria of criticism that Notovitch had estab-
lished for his work: "Did those passages exist in the
monastery of Himis, and have I faithfully repro-
duced their substance?"


J 38 ELIZABETH CLARE PROPHET CHAPTER ONE

Wrote Douglas:

I have visited Himis, and have endeav-
oured by patient and impartial inquiry to
find out the truth respecting M. Noto-
vitch's remarkable story, with the result
that, while I have not found one single fact
to support his statements, all the weight of
evidence goes to disprove them beyond all
shadow of doubt. It is certain that no such
passages as M. Notovitch pretends to have
translated exist in the monastery of Himis,
and therefore it is impossible that he could
have ‘faithfully reproduced’ the same.

While Douglas concluded that Notovitch's
Life of Saint Issa was a "literary forgery," he
satisfied himself that Notovitch had indeed visited
Leh and possibly Himis. The chief lama _ told
Douglas that no Russian had been to Himis in
1887 and 1888, but in the course of his investiga-
tion the professor discovered that the lama could
not distinguish between a Russian, a European,
and an American. Douglas reported that the lama,
on being shown a photograph of Notovitch, con-
fessed that "he might have mistaken him for an
‘English sahib.""

Through "careful inquiries," Douglas deter-
mined that a Russian by the name of Notovitch
had been treated by a "Dr. Karl Marks," the
medical officer at Leh Hospital, "when suffering
not from a broken leg, but from the less romantic


THE LOST YEARS OF JESUS 2 3

but hardly less painful complaint—toothache."
Douglas even conceded that Notovitch could have
broken his leg after departing from Leh, but main-
tained that "the whole story of the broken leg, in so
far as it relates to Himis Monastery, is neither more
nor less than a fiction."

In a postscript to Douglas' article, Miiller said
that from the start he had been convinced that
Notovitch's Unknown Life of Jesus Christ was pure
fiction. But when writing his own article, he said
he felt he had to give the Russian "the benefit of a
doubt and to suggest that he might possibly have
been hoaxed by Buddhist priests from whom he
professed to have gathered his information about
Issa, ie., Jesus.”"52

Miiller said that at the time he had not
thought the priests at Himis would be offended by
his remarks. But after reading Douglas’ article he
felt bound "to apologise to the excellent Lamas of
that monastery for having thought them capable of
such frivolity" and declared that Douglas had
effected not only a refutation, but an "annihila-
tion" of Notovitch's tale.

The credibility of The Unknown Life of Jesus
Christ was seriously damaged and the book be-
came harder to find. Notovitch went back to writ-
ing less controversial works like The Pacification of
Europe and Nicholas II and Russia and the English
Alliance. The story could have ended right there.

But it didn't. In fact the plot, as every lover of
a good mystery knows it must, began to thicken.


Contents

1 CHAPTER ONE

THE LOST YEARS OF JESUS

Analysis of eyewitness accounts
of travelers who have made the trek
to Himis

3 The Case for Issa

ILLUSTRATIONS - Paintings

THE ART OF NICHOLAS ROERICH

iv

75

76
77
78
79
80
81
82
83

Issa and the Skull of the Giant

Portrait of Nicholas Roerich
by Sviatoslav Roerich

The Mountain Schitrovaya

Pink Mountains, Himalayas

Midnight

The Watch on the Himalayas

The Walled Stronghold

Signs of Christ

Mount of Five Treasures, Kanchenjunga

The Steed of Good Fortune
Leh, Ladakh


J 40 ELIZABETH CLARE PROPHET CHAPTER ONE

Naturally, to some it seemed like an open-and-
shut case of literary forgery: the Russian in the
drawing room with a fountain pen. Douglas had
caught him "red-handed"—he had taken a depo-
sition from the old and venerable and highly
respected lama in the presence of the former post-
master of Ladakh, who had served as his interpreter.

In the midst of the proceedings, while Douglas
was reading him excerpts of Notovitch's book, the
lama was reported to have spontaneously cried out,
"Sun, sun, sun, manna mi dug!”—that is, "Lies,
lies, lies, nothing but lies!" At another time, accord-
ing to Douglas, the lama asked if anyone could be
prosecuted for writing such blatantly false accounts.

On the basis of these and other allegations, it
might have been hard to conclude anything other
than that Notovitch was guilty as charged. But any
detective worth his London Fog knows that things
are seldom what they seem. In fact, it would be
precisely at that point that the sleuth in him would
start to ask: Is The Life of Saint Issa really a literary
forgery? Did Notovitch artfully conceive and exe-
cute a hoax? If so, what was his motive?>’ Fame?
Fortune? Did he have accomplices? Was he an
agent of the Czar as Hale suggested? If he was,
did that have any bearing on the case? And if
Notovitch did pass a forgery, did he really think he
could get away with it?

Ladakh is a high, cold, remote, barren land.
It was an independent kingdom on and off for
about one thousand years. In 1834, it was subdued


THE LOST YEARS OF JESUS 2 3

by the rulers of Jammu and in 1947 became a
district of India's Jammu and Kashmir State, bor-
dering Pakistan, Tibet, and Chinese Turkestan.

Himalayan peaks rise from its lofty plateaus. It
is an exotic place, a refuge of Tibetan Buddhist
culture—no doubt a romantic setting for a story.
But it was by no means inaccessible. Notovitch
must have known that someone would go to
Himis, probably sooner than later, and check out
his story as he urged them to do. With the chance
of detection so likely, as Miiller himself pointed
out, would the Russian have taken such a chance?
Even Miiller found that hard to believe."

Still, that is the way it looked. In reality,
however, there was conflicting testimony: the word
of a Russian journalist and the contradictory word
of a British(?) professor. The fact that Douglas
failed to see a copy of a manuscript was no more
decisive proof that it did not exist than Notovitch's
claim that it did. Nevertheless, it seemed as if either
Notovitch or Douglas were telling the truth—not
both. And ifthe weight of publicly expressed opin-
ion was a litmus of honesty, Douglas tested true.

Appearances can be deceiving, of course.
Were there other possibilities? Could the lama have
deceived Notovitch, as Miiller first suggested? Did
Notovitch faithfully record what was read to him as
translated by his interpreter, group the verses, and
publish it, as he claimed? Or, could it be that the
chief lama at Himis was not entirely candid with
Professor Douglas?


J #2 ELIZABETH CLARE PROPHET CHAPTER ONE

Assuming for a moment that the core of
Notovitch's account is accurate (that is, allowing
for any possible dramatization of the story, that the
manuscript did indeed exist and he reproduced it)
and that Douglas, as everyone has assumed, wrote
an accurate account, how can we explain the dis-
crepancy? Perhaps the answer lies in the realm of
"Eastern diplomacy."

Notovitch asserted that when a Westerner asks
about a particular treasure, the lamas believe it is
because he intends to carry it off. That being the
case, the Russian said he was circumspect in his
approach to the documents and was convinced that
his discretion was instrumental in gaining him
access to them. From his article, it appears that
Professor Douglas was forthright and direct. If
Notovitch's assessment is correct, that could have
led to a flat denial.

We will never know precisely what happened
between Douglas and the lama at Himis, or
between Notovitch and the lama—if such a visit
actually took place. However, after spending most
of the 1974-75 winter in Ladakh, Tibetologists
Snellgrove and Skorupski made an observation
about Himis that lends credence to the "Eastern
diplomacy" theory. In The Cultural Heritage of
Ladakh they wrote:

Hemis is not an easy monastery to get
to know. It seems to attract far more visitors
than any monastery in Ladakh, and very
few of them have any idea of what they are


THE LOST YEARS OF JESUS 2 3

looking at. This tends to produce on the
part of the monks a supercilious attitude
and even outright contempt, and they seem
convinced that all foreigners steal if they
can. There have in fact been quite serious
losses of property in recent years, which
were still being investigated by the Super-
intendent of Police while we were there,
and as usual foreigners are not in fact
responsible.** [emphasis added]

Whatever happened, the whole affair began to
develop the flavor of an offbeat drama with curious
characters: a professor of undetermined national-
ity, a Russian writer, a Ladakhi lama, a famous
philologist, and a supporting cast of scholars, news-
men, Moravian missionaries, English officers, a
physician with a suspicious name, some travelers,
and a missing document maybe—the existence of
which had not yet been established. Notovitch
did not bring back a copy of it, or even photo-
graphs of its pages, as proof of its existence. And
Douglas was told that no such document existed
at all.

Was it a case of no document or a reluctant
lama? A fabrication by Notovitch? Naivete on the
part of Douglas? Something else? Due to a lack of
evidence, it was impossible to tell. In fact, at that
point there was so little conclusive evidence that
even a great detective might have been stymied. So
what thickened the plot? Elementary, my dear
Watson: more evidence.


J 44 ELIZABETH CLARE PROPHET CHAPTER ONE

It came in the form of eyewitness reports from
visitors to Himis—the first of which had more than
a touch of irony. It was made by Swami Abheda-
nanda—a close acquaintance if not an outright
friend of Max Miiller—who claimed not only to
have seen the document but to have verified, in a
manner of speaking, Notovitch's story.

Abhedananda was the ideal kind of person to
make an on-the-spot assessment of the situation at
Himis. Born Kaliprasad Chandra, October 2,
1866, in Calcutta, India, he became proficient in
English and Sanskrit at an early age." When he
was eighteen, he entered Calcutta Oriental Semi-
nary where his father, Professor Rasiklal Chandra,
held the chair in English for twenty-five years.

A precocious scholar versed in the literature of
both East and West, Kaliprasad was a voracious
reader with a penchant for philosophy who in his
youth digested works as diverse as the Bhagavad Gita
and John Stuart Mill's System of Logic. He exam-
ined all schools of thought, attended numerous
lectures by yogis, pundits, and exponents of Chris-
tianity, Brahmoism, and Hinduism, and in 1884
became a disciple of the Indian saint Ramakrishna.

Beginning in 1886, he walked the length and
width of Hindustan, barefoot and without money.
For ten years he endured privations, contemplated
the Absolute, made pilgrimages to the sacred
places at Puri, Rishikesh, and Kedarnath, among
others, and lived at the sources of the Jumna and
Ganges rivers in the Himalayas.


THE LOST YEARS OF JESUS 2 3

In 1896, he donned Western garb and sailed
to London where he began his career as a preacher
and exponent of Vedanta (a Hindu philosophy
based on the Vedas) and met distinguished schol-
ars such as the noted German Sanskritist Paul
Deussen and the redoubtable Max Miiller.

It is difficult to tell just how deep a bond
developed between the two men. Abhedananda
was in London only a year before he left to spread
Vedanta in the United States. Nevertheless, they
met a number of times—conversing in English
(Miiller could only read Sanskrit, not speak it)—
and seemed to have enjoyed each other's company.

If nothing else, their relationship was based
on a mutual respect and common interests, not the
least of which was Ramakrishna, for whom Miiller
had a deep and abiding regard. Abhedananda spoke
at length to him about his master; and what Miiller
learned about the Indian saint from his disciple
aided considerably in the preparation of his book
Ramakrishna: His Life and Sayings. On Miiller's
passing in 1900, Abhedananda—representing the
Hindu and Sanskrit scholars of India—paid tribute
to him at a public meeting organized by the phi-
losophy and philology departments at Columbia
University.

No doubt it would have been something of a
shock for the Oxford professor to have heard his
friend corroborate Notovitch's tale. Would he have
accepted it graciously? Denied it? Demanded fur-
ther proof? We will never know. Miiller passed away


J 46 ELIZABETH CLARE PROPHET CHAPTER ONE

twenty-two years before Abhedananda determined
for himself that Notovitch's account was true.

It is even difficult to say if the two men ever
discussed The Unknown Life of Jesus Christ.
Although Abhedananda was in London shortly
after the book's publication, he may not have read
it until he went to America.*8

There are conflicting reports about Abheda-
nanda's attitude toward the book, but he was not
necessarily a true believer—at least at first. In The
Jesus Mystery (1980), Richard and Janet Bock's
account of their search for evidence to corroborate
the Issa legend,* Mrs. Bock reports that Abheda-
nanda was skeptical and went to Himis to "expose"
Notovitch—a conclusion she based on an interview
with Abhedananda's disciple Swami Prajnananda.

Yet several passages from the work of one of
Abhedananda's biographers, Sister Shivani (Mrs.
Mary LePage), suggest that "expose" is too strong a
word. While working at Princeton University Press
sometime between 1912 and 1916, Sister Shivani
recalled a remark "I had once heard the Swami
make from the platform to the effect that the years
preceding Christ's ministry had been said to have
been spent in India with the Yogis of Tibet."°°

Her interest thus reawakened, she wrote to
both a Dr. Miller, who held the chair in Church

*The Bocks became interested in the lost yean after reading The Aquarian
Gospel of Jesus the Christ by Levi and Notovitch's Unknown Life of Jesus Christ.
In the course of their frequent journevs to India, they spent four months
shooting a Rim retracing Jesus' footsteps through the subcontinent as outlined in
The Life of Saint Issa. Their film. The Lost Years, completed in 1978, has
acquainted many in America and Europe with the story ofjesus' pilgrimage to
the East prior to his Palestinian mission.



THE LOST YEARS OF JESUS 2 3

History at Princeton, and Swami Abhedananda.
Dr. Miller, in reply, said he knew of no such
historical record. But, reported Sister Shivani, "the
Swami wrote telling me to read the Russian writer
Notovitch's The Unknown Life of Christ.”®

It took her several years to locate a copy.
Nevertheless, if Abhedananda had been suffi-
ciently skeptical of Notovitch's book to want to
expose it, it is puzzling that he would have told his
disciple to read it without informing her of his
misgivings.

Two of his biographies, An Apostle of Monism:
An Authentic Account of the Activities of Swami
Abhedananda in America by Sister Shivani and
Swami Abhedananda: A Spiritual Biography by Dr.
Moni Bagchi, state that Abhedananda was eager to
"verify and confirm" (they used identical words)
Notovitch's claim.*!

Keen though his interest may have been, it
was years before Abhedananda got the chance to
substantiate it. He was busy spreading Vedanta in
America. From 1897 to 1921, he traveled exten-
sively throughout the United States, Canada, and
Mexico, lecturing on various aspects of Vedanta in
almost every major American city.

As in London, he became acquainted with
the American glitterati and intelligentsia: he was
received at the White House by President William
McKinley, met Thomas A. Edison and, at the
home of William James, discussed at length the
problem of "the unity of the ultimate Reality" with


J 48 ELIZABETH CLARE PROPHET CHAPTER ONE

his host and professors Josiah Royce, Nathaniel
Shaler, and Lewis Janes, chairman of the Cam-
bridge Philosophical Conferences.

Finally, in July of 1921, Abhedananda sailed
for India from the port of San Francisco. In 1922,
at the age of 56, the peripatetic pilgrim took his
staffin hand and set off for Himis. "It had been my
cherished dream all along to cross the Himalayas
on foot," he is recorded to have said.*' In his diary
he wrote:

In 1922...1 went to Tibet from Kashmere,
crossing the Himalayas on foot, to study the
manners, customs and the Buddhistic phi-
losophy and Lamaism which prevail among
the Tibetan Lamas. I went along Yarkand
Road, the highway to Europe and stopped at
"Leh," the capital of Ladak, in Western
Tibet. My destination was "Hemis Monas-
tery" about twenty-five miles north of the
City of Leh.#

Abhedananda recorded the events of his jour-
ney in Kashmir O Tibbate (in English, In Kashmir
and Tibet). Here he writes that after a tour of the
monastery he asked the lamas about the veracity of
Notovitch's tale. It was then that he "learned from
them that the account was indeed true."%®

In Kashmir and Tibet is a curious book. It
was composed in stages, partly by Abhedananda
himself and partly by an assistant who worked from
his diary and original notes. According to Dr.


THE LOST YEARS OF JESUS 2 3

Bagchi, after the journey Abhedananda returned
to Calcutta and gave his notes to Brahmachari
Bhairav Chaitanya, an attendant who accompa-
nied him to Tibet. He asked Chaitanya to prepare
an outline of his journey, which he apparently
intended to develop into a travelogue.®

With the help of some standard references on
Kashmir and Tibet, Chaitanya did so. But in the
years that followed, Abhedananda was too busy to
revise and expand the notes.

In 1927, the rough account appeared in serial
form in Visvavani, the monthly organ of the
Ramakrishna Vedanta Math (monastery), evoking
considerable interest. Then, with the aid of his
own notes and ancillary source materials, Abheda-
nanda reportedly revised the entire work. In 1929,
it appeared in book form and was entitled Parivra-
jaka Swami Abhedananda, later renamed Kashmir
O_ Tibbate.

In 1954, fifteen years after Abhedananda's
passing, it was edited by his disciple Swami Prajna-
nanda and published in a revised second edition. It
would appear that the book was not entirely revised
by Abhedananda, inasmuch as in the section
describing his verification of the document, Abhe-
dananda is referred to in the third person as
"Swamiji."

Despite the peculiar manner in which In
Kashmir and Tibet was written, there is little doubt
as to its message concerning the matter of Noto-
vitch and his alleged find. The text unambiguously


viii CONTENTS

84 Path to Tibet

85 Tsam in Mongolia
86 Tibet

87 Glacial Heights
88 = Remember

89 Star of the Hero
90 Maitreya

91 CHAPTER TWO

THE UNKNOWN LIFE OF
JESUS CHRIST

Nicolas Notovitch's original work,
including The Life of Saint Issa

92 Photograph of Nicolas Notovitch
93 Translator's Note
100 To the Publishers
115 Preface
122 Journey to Thibet
212 The Life of Saint Issa
Best of the Sons of Men
ENCRAVINGS
121 The Authors Itinerary across India

164 The Author's Itinerary across
Kashmir and Ladak

168  Ladakian Women


J 50 ELIZABETH CLARE PROPHET CHAPTER ONE

recounts the essentials of the Russian author's tale,
including his convalescence at Himis with a bro-
ken leg, Abhedananda's inquiry about Notovitch,
and the lama's confirmation:

"The lama who was showing Swamiji around
took a manuscript [about Issa] off the shelf and
showed it to Swamiji. He said that it was a copy
and the original was in a monastery at Marbour
near Lhasa. The original was written in Pali, but
this was a translation into Tibetan"®’—all consis-
tent with Notovitch's claim.

At Abhedananda's request, a lama helped him
translate the text into English,** which was later
translated into Bengali and published (along with
excerpts of the English version of The Life of Saint
Issa from Notovitch's Unknown Life of Jesus
Christ) in In Kashmir and Tibet. Whatever skepti-
cism Abhedananda may have had at the onset,
after having gone to Himis, interrogated the lamas,
and examined the document in question, he felt
sufficiently sure of its authenticity to reprint selec-
tions from the Notovitch account in his own book.

With the exception of an excerpt from The
Unknown Life of Jesus Christ, In Kashmir and
Tibet was written in Bengali. To the best of our
knowledge, the book has never been translated into
English. In order to give our readers access to the
basic documents needed to understand this issue,
we have had the relevant portions of Kashmir O
Tibbate translated into English for the first time-
through the kindness and devotion of Prasan
Kumar De, Per Sinclair, and Jayasri Majumdar.


THE LOST YEARS OF JESUS 2 3

Like Abhedananda, biographers Bagchi and
Shivani had complete faith in the Notovitch story.
Both stated, again using nearly identical words,
that "those who have read this work and considered
soberly its strange intriguing research, and which
no scholar has been able to refute, may realize it
was no idle quest" that led Abhedananda to under-
take the trek to Himis.®

A third biographer, Ashutosh Ghosh, con-
curred. In Swami Abhedananda: The Patriot-Saint
he wrote, "He reached the 'Himis Monastery’ on
the 4th October, and discovered a manuscript of
the unknown life of Jesus Christ which was previ-
ously recorded by a Russian traveller, Nicholas
Notovich, and with the help of a senior Lama he
got a translated copy of the important portions of
the life of Jesus and had it incorporated in Bengali
in his book 'Kashmir O Tibbate.'"”°

The chemistry between Abhedananda and
the lamas at Himis was entirely different than that
between Notovitch or Douglas and the lamas.
Abhedananda was not a culturally distant journal-
ist or professor. He was a disciple of Ramakrishna,
a scholar, a preacher, a world traveler, and a one-
time ascetic who lived for three months in a
Himalayan cave at the source of the Ganges. He
was too much a kinsman and too perceptive to be
taken in by any "waggish monks," as Miiller put it.

There are a few discrepancies, however, be-
tween Notovitch's and Abhedananda's version of the
text, probably due to the fact that both have gone
through numerous translations. The Pali original


J 52 ELIZABETH CLARE PROPHET CHAPTER ONE

was first translated into Tibetan. It is not known in
what language Notovitch first wrote down the verses
as they were being translated to him—perhaps his
native Russian or French. But we do know they were
eventually published in French and later translated
into English. The verses Abhedananda published
had a similar odyssey: Tibetan, English, Bengali,
and then back to English.

Abhedananda added a few details that are
absent from the Russian's account, including a
footnote which described how "Jesus halted at a
wayside pond near Kabul to wash his hands and
feet, and rested there for a while. That pond still
exists. It is known as 'Issa-pond.' To mark the
event, every year a fair is held at this place. This is
mentioned in an Arabic book, Tarig-A-Ajhan.””
Whether this indicates the existence of a different
version or a more complete rendering of the same
text it is hard to say.

Like Douglas, Abhedananda went to Himis
for the express purpose of verifying Notovitch's
story. Unlike Douglas, he claimed not only to have
seen but to have written down verses translated by a
lama from the same book that was read to Noto-
vitch. Although this does much to authenticate
Notovitch's story—especially the existence of the
document and his faithful reproduction of its
verses—it still falls short of conclusive proof.
Abhedananda did not bring back either photos or a
copy of the text. And he was entirely dependent on
the lama for its translation from Tibetan.


THE LOST YEARS OF JESUS 2 3

More evidence was needed, and more evi-
dence was forthcoming—this time from the able
pen of Nicholas Roerich, a remarkable man who
wrote extensively about Saint Issa's travels in the
East. Between 1924 and 1928 he led an expedition
through Central Asia—Sikkim, Punjab, Kashmir,
Ladakh, Karakoram, Khotan, Kashgar, Karashahr,
Urumchi, Irtysh, the Altai Mountains, the Oyrot
region, Mongolia, Central Gobi, Kansu, Tsaidam,
and Tibet. In the course of his journey he recorded
the living history of Issa's sojourn in the East
embodied in traditions cherished by peoples of
various nations and religions across the vast ex-
panse of Asia and discovered one or more manu-
scripts on the subject. His writings on Saint Issa
are included in chapter 4 of this volume.

Born in St. Petersburg, Russia, on October
10, 1874, Roerich studied at the University of St.
Petersburg and the Academy of Fine Arts. In 1898
he was appointed to a professorship at the Imperial
Archaeological Institute and by 1920 he was
already an internationally acclaimed artist.

Typically described in biographical notes as "a
Russian-born painter, poet, archeologist, philoso-
pher, and mystic,"”? Roerich was also a diplomat,
writer, critic, educator, set and costume designer,
and explorer.

"Perhaps no traveler from the West has been
better equipped, in knowledge, spirit and psychology
to travel in the East," wrote Dr. Garabed Paelian
in his study Nicholas Roerich. "Few, certainly,


J 54 ELIZABETH CLARE PROPHET CHAPTER ONE

have gone there with higher motives, ideas of
synthesis, service and the desire to find truth and
beauty."”"

Nicholas, his wife, Helena, and son George
were the "main force" of his Central Asian expedi-
tion, which consisted of nine Europeans, thirty-six
natives, and 102 camels, yaks, horses, and mules.
They were accompanied during their journey
through Sikkim by Roerich's other son, Sviatoslav,
and a well-known scholar of Tibetan literature,
Lama Lobzang Mingyur Dorje.

The expedition had many purposes. The prin-
cipal objective was to create a pictorial record ofthe
lands and peoples of Central Asia. During the trek,
Nicholas Roerich painted 500 pictures, some of
which have been reproduced in this book. The team
had other goals as well—to study the position of
ancient monuments and the condition of contem-
porary religions, to trace the migrations of nations,
survey the possibilities for future archaeological
explorations, and obtain a far-reaching collection of
ethnographic and linguistic material on the culture
of inner Asia.

Because of his unique skills, George Roerich
made untold contributions throughout the journey.
He was a noted archaeologist and Orientalist trained
at Harvard and the School of Oriental Languages in
Paris, among other places, and by Lama Lobzang
Mingyur Dorje.

George had studied Persian, Sanskrit, Chi-
nese, and Tibetan. "This extensive knowledge of


THE LOST YEARS OF JESUS 2 3

languages provides him with the key to the mysteries
of the ‘closed land,'" wrote Louis Marin, former
president of the Society of Ethnography, Paris, in
the preface to George Roerich's account of the expe-
dition, Trails to Inmost Asia, published in 1931.

"Because of his knowledge of the languages
and customs of the countries," Marin continued,
"George Roerich visited Buddhist monasteries,
usually completely forbidden to strangers; he dis-
covered a complete collection of the sacred books
of the Bon-po religion, three hundred volumes,
which constitute an inestimable treasure for the
history of religions and oriental research."”4

In order to insure the success of the expedi-
tion, George spent a year (1924) in Sikkim, in the
Eastern Himalayas, honing his language skills. "It
was imperative to acquire a good speaking knowl-
edge of the Tibetan language before starting on a
journey which would require constant relations
with natives," George wrote in Trails to Inmost
Asia.” Evidently the time was well spent because
Nicholas later wrote, "How wonderful that George
knows all necessary Tibetan dialects."

There was probably another though less offi-
cial reason for the journey. Long before Leonard
Nimoy led millions of Americans in search of all
kinds of intriguing mysteries, Nicholas Roerich was
searching for the factual realities veiled by the folk
legends of the Orient. According to Garabed
Paelian, Roerich believed, as did Pliny, that "one is
led to truth through the interpretation ofa myth."””


J 56 ELIZABETH CLARE PROPHET CHAPTER ONE

"In every city, in every encampment of Asia,”
said Roerich, "I tried to unveil what memories were
cherished in the folk-memory. Through these
guarded and preserved tales, you may recognize the
reality of the past. In every spark of folklore there is
a drop of the great Truth adorned or distorted."”

While traveling in Asia, he collected legends
of a race of underground dwellers,” legends and
factual evidence of the early migrations of Euro-
peans (including the Goths and Druids) to and
from Asia, stories of Solomon and his flying car-
pet, the coming of Maitreya, the legend of Sham-
balla and, of course, the legend of Saint Issa.

Professor Roerich's experiences on the expedi-
tion provided him with a wealth of material which
subsequently appeared in numerous books. Three,
in particular, concentrate on the expedition: Hima-
laya (1926), Heart of Asia (1929), and his travel
diary Altai-Himalaya (1929) which, "more than
almost any other book that has been written,"
observed a reviewer for American Magazine of Art
(December 1929), "manifests the supreme domi-
nance of beauty in the mind of a true artist, and
indicates at one and the same time the simple
greatness, the unique character of the author."*

Altai-Himalaya is an unusual work in that it
is a series of observations by the author—notes
"penned on horseback and in the tent"s!—rather
than a book with a formal organization or line of
attack. In it Roerich wrote extensively about Issa's
sojourn in the East because, among other reasons,


THE LOST YEARS OF JESUS 2 3

he came across it so often, beginning in Kashmir at
the very start of his journey.

"In Srinagar we first encountered the curious
legend about Christ's visit to this place. Afterwards
we saw how widely spread in India, in Ladak and in
Central Asia, was the legend of the visit of Christ to
these parts during his long absence, quoted in the
gospel," he recorded in Heart of Asia.*?

As the legend cropped up again and again—in
Kashmir, Ladakh, Mongolia, Sinkiang, and other
places—Professor Roerich "learned how wide-
spread are the legends about Issa" and that the
"lamas know the significance of these legends."®'
He heard several variations of the legend but in
Heart of Asia noted that "all versions agree on one
point, that during the time of His absence, Christ
was in India and Asia."*

Professor Roerich found more than legends.
He referred repeatedly to "writings" and "manu-
scripts." For example, while in Ladakh he noted,
"The writings of the lamas recall how Christ
extolled woman—the Mother of the World. And
lamas point out how Christ regarded the so-called
miracles."*5 (emphasis added)

An entry in Himalaya, which precedes a long
quote from an ancient manuscript, reads: "Let us
hearken to the way in which, in the mountains of
Tibet, they speak of Christ. In the documents
which have the antiquity of about 1500 years one
may read: 'Issa secretly left his parents and together
with the merchants of Jerusalem turned towards


J 58 ELIZABETH CLARE PROPHET CHAPTER ONE

Ind to become perfected in the Divine Word. And
for the study of the laws of the Great Buddha.'"*
The story that follows is in many places nearly the
same as Notovitch's Life of Saint Issa.

One long passage from Altai-Himalaya,  re-
corded while Roerich was in Leh, is particularly
noteworthy and poses some difficult questions.

Three items of information reached us
in one day about the legends of Jesus. A
Hindu said to us: "I have heard from one
Ladaki official that according to the words of
the former Abbot of Hemis, there was a_ tree
and a small pool in Leh beside which Jesus
taught.” (This is some new version about a
tree and a pool, unheard before.)

The missionary says: "A nonsensical
invention composed by a Pole who sat in
Hemis several months." (One may ask why
invented, when it coincides with other ver-
sions and proofs.)...

A good and sensitive Hindu spoke
meaningfully about the manuscript of the
life of Issa. "Why does one always place Issa
in Egypt during the time of his absence from
Palestine? His young years of course were
passed in study. The traces of his learning
have naturally impressed themselves upon
his later sermons. To what sources do these
sermons lead? What is there in them of
Egyptian? And why does one not see traces
of Buddhism—of India? It is difficult to


THE LOST YEARS OF JESUS 2 3

understand why the wandering of Issa by
caravan path into India and into the region
now occupied by Tibet should be so vehe-
mently denied."...

.. There are always those who love
scornfully to deny when something difficult
enters their consciousness; but then, knowl-
edge is transformed into seminaristic scho-
lasticism and slander is cultivated as a fine
art. In what possible way could a_ recent
forgery penetrate into the consciousness of
the whole East? And where is the scientist
who could write a long treatise in Pali and
Tibetan? We do not know such an _ one.*
[emphasis added]

Naturally, while in Ladakh Roerich visited
Himis. But he found it to be a disappointing place
where "one feels the strange atmosphere of dark-
ness and dejection," where "black ravens fly above"
and "the lamas are half-literate."

As a prelude to his comments on Himis, in
Himalaya he noted:

Regarding the manuscripts of Christ-
first there was a complete denial. Of course
denial first comes from the circle of mis-
sionaries. Then slowly, little by little, are
creeping fragmentary reticent details, diffi-
cult to obtain. Finally it appears—that about
the manuscripts, the old people in Ladak
have heard and know.


176
178

180
182
184
187
188
191
192
195
196
199
200

CONTENTS

Young People Dressed for a Wedding

Leh, Capital of Ladak (Little Thibet),
Seen from the Carare

Portrait of the Governor of Ladak
Thibetan Lamas

Musicians of the Monastery

Masqueraders with Conical Hats
Copper Masks
Thlogan-Poudma-Jungnas
Masqueraders in the Suite of the Gods
Masqueraders with Golden Crowns
The God of Animals

Youths Dressed as Warriors

Youths Dressed as Warriors

CHAPTER THREE
ON THE TRAIL TO HIMIS

248
249
251
256

Selections from Swami Abhedananda's
In Kashmir and Tibet with his
translation of the Himis manuscript

Photograph of Swami Abhedananda
Editor's Note
Himis Monastery

Jesus Christ, the Leader of Men
As Described in the Manuscript
of the Himis Retreat

ix


J 60 ELIZABETH CLARE PROPHET CHAPTER ONE

Then referring specifically to Himis, he continued:

And such documents as manuscripts
about Christ and the Book of Chambhalla lie
in the "darkest" place. And the figure of the
lama—the compiler of the book—stands like
an idol in some sort of fantastic headgear.
And how many other relics have perished in
dusty corners?* For the tantrik-lamas have
no interest in them. It was necessary to see
this other side of Buddhism.®?

In sum, Roerich's writings do about every-
thing that can be done to establish the existence
and authenticity of one or more documents that
describe Jesus’ sojourn in the East, short of actually
retrieving one. He discovered the legend through-
out Asia, preserved among peoples of varying lands
and religions. He made numerous references to
"writings" and "manuscripts"—some of which he
saw, others of which people talked about—that said
Issa had traveled to the East. His reference to the
Himis manuscript lying in the "darkest place" is
reminiscent of the stronghold of the "Dark Trea-
sury" described by Tibetologists Snellgrove and
Skorupski. And he even recorded a story in which
the head abbot of Himis speaks of the legend.

Although there is no question that Roerich
was familiar with Notovitch's work, his sources of
the _legend_were his own. "Many remember the

*We now see why il is entirely possible that the lama at Himis told Notovitch he
was not sure just where in the monastery the manuscripts about Issa were to be
found (see pp. 16-17).



THE LOST YEARS OF JESUS 2 3

lines from the book of Notovitch," he wrote while
in Leh, "but it is still more wonderful to discover,
on this site, in several variants, the same version of
the legend of Issa. The local people know nothing
of any published book but they know the legend
and with deep reverence they speak of Issa."*?

Moreover, while there is a resemblance be-
tween the texts that Roerich and Notovitch found
(sixty verses spread over ten chapters of Notovitch's
Life of Saint Issa are parallel to the text Roerich
included in Himalaya), Roerich published material
about Saint Issa from manuscripts that were not
reproduced by Notovitch.

Roerich recorded the pattern of the initial
denial of the legend, followed by the emergence of
salient details, and then the open and frank discus-
sion of the legends and/or manuscripts. He noted
that in Leh

Issa communed... with the people on his
way from Tibet. Secretly and cautiously the
legends are guarded. It is difficult to sound
them because lamas, above all people, know
how to keep silent. Only by means ofa com-
mon language—and not merely that of tongue
but also of inner understanding—can one
approach their significant mysteries. One be-
comes convinced that every educated Gelong
knows much. Even by his eyes one cannot
guess when he agrees or inwardly laughs at
you, knowing more than yourself. How many


J 62 ELIZABETH CLARE PROPHET CHAPTER ONE

stories these silent ones can tell of the pass-
ing "savants" who have found themselves in
the most ridiculous positions! But now has
come the time of the illumination of Asia.

Without question, Professor Roerich believed
the texts were authentic. When the historical reli-
ability was less certain, as in the case of some
material he published about Issa in Himalaya, he
made a point of it.%!

Because of George Roerich's ability to speak
the various Tibetan dialects, the Roerichs had no
problem communicating in Ladakh, nor would
they have been dependent upon a lama at Himis
for a translation. Not to mention the fact that
George was more than capable of making an expert
assessment of such documents.

Finally, the eminent scholar of Tibetan litera-
ture Lama Lobzang Mingyur Dorje accompanied
the Roerichs for part of the journey. It is not clear
from the writings of either Nicholas or George if he
was with them at Himis—or wherever they found
the manuscripts—where he could also have offered
an expert opinion and warned them if the docu-
ments were a fake or of questionable origin. And in
the unlikely circumstance that Professor Roerich
had published spurious manuscripts, no doubt the
lama would have spoken up and spared his friend
further embarrassment.

Did Nicholas Roerich discover the same doc-
ument that Notovitch and Abhedananda claimed


THE LOST YEARS OF JESUS 2 3

to have found? We do not know. Roerich himself
does not specify. George Roerich, concentrating
on scientific data, does not discuss the documents.
If what Notovitch allegedly found existed, it is
possible that Nicholas Roerich saw a copy of it. Or
it is possible that he found variant texts. Or both.

After the publication of the three books in
which he wrote at length about Issa's sojourn in the
East (Himalaya, Altai-Himalaya, Heart of Asia),
Nicholas Roerich continued to refer to Issa here
and there in later works. But—and this is a turn of
events that would stop any detective in his tracks-
even though he wrote more extensively on the
subject than Notovitch, Roerich was not fiercely
attacked in the press as the Russian journalist had
been when he first reported finding documentation
that Jesus had been to the East. In fact, to the best
of our knowledge, Roerich was not criticized at all
by reputable scientists, linguists, theologians, or
even newsmen.

When Roerich reported the discovery, the Liter-
ary Digest (September 1, 1928) treated it as an aside:

Professor Roerich has already sent back
250 of his Tibetan paintings to the museum
in New York____Two years ago, when the
first consignment of these Himalayan pic-
tures arrived, his admirers brought out a
monograph about them, telling incidentally
of documents he had found in old Buddhist
monasteries in Tibet, which, he believed,


J64 ELIZABETH CLARE PROPHET CHAPTER ONE

furnished proof that Jesus had spent ten
years studying in that part of Asia prior to
His preaching in Palestine.’

And later when Penelope Chetwode—author
of Kulu: The End of the Habitable World (1972)—
dealt with the subject, she treated Roerich's "dis-
covery" of a document about Issa as a rediscovery
that was a bit old hat. She wrote:

In Tibet he claimed to have discovered an
ancient Buddhist chronicle which stated
that Christ had spent the ‘hidden years’
partly there and partly in India. This, in
fact, was nothing new as there has always
been a strong tradition that these were spent
in Kashmir where a collection of Our Lord's
sayings from this mysterious period of his
life is still preserved: one of them was
quoted by Akbar on his Victory Gate at
Fatehpur Sikri: ‘Said Jesus, on whom be
peace! The world is a bridge, pass over it but
build no house there. He who hopeth for an
hour, may hope for eternity; the world is but
an hour, spend it in devotion; the rest is
worth nothing.’

To be sure, the Roerichs met with their share
of controversy. The British government suspected
them of being spies, Henry Wallace (secretary of
agriculture 1933-40, vice-president of the United
States 1941-45), who was once an ardent friend
and supporter, became an enemy, and they had


THE LOST YEARS OF JESUS 2 3

major legal battles. But the accusations never cen-
tered on the validity of Roerich's discovery of the
legends or the writings which held that Jesus was in
India and Tibet.

Even though Roerich was an eminent scien-
tist, neither the academic nor the theological worlds
stopped to reassess the theory that Jesus had gone to
India. However, when Notovitch's Unknown Life
of Jesus Christ was republished in 1926, the noted
theologian Edgar J. Goodspeed wrote a critique of it
in his book Strange New Gospels.

Goodspeed's book was published in 1931, time
enough for him to have heard about both the
Abhedananda and Roerich visits to Himis. Yet in
his article, he mentions only that when The Un-
known Life of Jesus Christ was first published, "the
book called forth a vigorous controversy, attracting
the attention of no less an authority than Professor
F. Max Miiller of Oxford. It was discussed at length
in the pages of The Nineteenth Century, and then
forgotten." Goodspeed noted Douglas’ "annihila-
tion" of Notovitch and also added some comments
of his own by way of proving The Life of Saint Issa
had to be a forgery.”

But there was no mention of the writings or
adventures of Professor Roerich, who—if Abheda-
nanda was somewhat of a remote figure to the
author—was frequently the subject of articles in
the New York Times and other major papers.

Then the story took an unexpected twist.
Like a ghostly galleon sailing into the mists, the


J66 ELIZABETH CLARE PROPHET CHAPTER ONE

documents in question apparently disappeared. In
an interview with Richard Bock, Abhedananda's
disciple Swami Prajnananda disclosed: "I heard
from his own lips that he [Abhedananda] saw the
scrolls [at Himis] and he translated from them.
Years afterwards he inquired but they said the
scrolls were no longer there. I also requested to see
the scrolls, but there is nothing. There are no
scrolls. They have been removed, by whom we do
not know." Swami Prajnananda also said that the
Pali original had been removed from the Marbour
monastery in Lhasa, Tibet.

The Bocks do not say what year Abhedananda
made his inquiry. But just before he died on
September 8, 1939, the ghostly galleon slipped out
of the mist to make another brief appearance. This
time in the presence of perhaps the sole surviving
Westerner allegedly to see (and thus provide an-
other glimmer of corroboration) the document in
question— Elisabeth G. Caspari.

In the summer of 1939, Madame Caspari, a
Swiss musician and professor of music pedagogy,
and her husband, Charles, were on a pilgrimage to
Mount Kailas organized and directed by a religious
leader of considerable renown, Mrs. Clarence
Gasque. Kailas—located in Tibet near the head-
waters of the Brahmaputra, Indus, and Sutlej
rivers—is famous in Sanskrit literature as Shiva's
paradise and was a popular pilgrimage retreat.

The pilgrims took the same route as Noto-
vitch, across the Zoji Pass, through Mulbekh and
Lamayuru, to Himis on their way to Mount


THE LOST YEARS OF JESUS 2 3

Kailas. They planned to reach Himis in time to see
the three-day festival held each year in commemo-
ration of Saint Padma Sambhava.

In many ways their journey was not unusual.
There is only one road that leads from Srinigar to
Leh and, when traveling to Himis from that part of
India, that is the road that must be taken. Nor was
it unusual to arrive around the time of the annual
Himis festival, which is a major attraction. But
there was something unique about their journey
that was related to a spell of bad luck Notovitch
said he experienced.

The Russian journalist claimed that he took
numerous photographs in Ladakh and throughout
his journey but lost them due to the carelessness of
one of his servants who had inadvertently opened
the box of exposed plates and destroyed them. Max
Miiller made much of this "unfortunate" loss
which at the time could have proven Notovitch
had actually gone to Himis. Later, of course,
Douglas established that the Russian author did
visit Leh and possibly Himis, but as for the photo-
graphs—it would take something of a miracle to
get those back.

Well, now and then miracles do happen. Was
it Providence? Fate? or some other unseen force
that, in a manner of speaking, retrieved the lost
photos after the fact? Whatever it was, the Casparis
took pictures documenting the entire journey and
recaptured the same scenes that Notovitch had
witnessed —even pictures of the festival at Himis.

Mrs. Gasque was known internationally and


J 68 ELIZABETH CLARE PROPHET CHAPTER ONE

she and her party were most cordially received
everywhere they went throughout the pilgrimage.
In one case, an Indian maharajah literally rolled
out a red carpet to greet them. And at Himis,
although the travelers arrived just after the mystery
play was over, the lamas performed it a second
time in honor of their coming!

But that was not all. A few days after the
performance, when seated alone on the roof of the
monastery, Mrs. Gasque and Madame Caspari
were approached by the librarian of the convent
and two other monks. They were carrying three
manuscripts in ornate coverings, one of which the
librarian ceremoniously unwrapped. He then pre-
sented Mrs. Gasque the parchment leaves and with
great reverence said, "These books say your Jesus
was here.”

The manuscripts? Three books presented by
the convent's librarian with the explanation that
they said Jesus had been there?

While we have no reason not to take the
monks at their word, unfortunately we do not know
what the books said. They were written in Tibetan
and neither of the two women asked for a transla-
tion. However, Madame Caspari did take a picture
of the lama proudly displaying the book.

As an eyewitness, Madame Caspari's back-
ground differs considerably from that of Douglas,
Abhedananda, and Roerich—all of whom were
quite familiar with Notovitch's work when they
made the journey to Himis. Although Madame


THE LOST YEARS OF JESUS 2 3

Caspari had once heard it mentioned that Jesus had
gone to India, it had long since passed from her
mind. She was not aware of Notovitch's alleged
discovery or of the publication of The Unknown
Life of Jesus Christ in 1894, nor of the controversy
that followed, or even of the subsequent writings
on the subject by Swami Abhedananda or Professor
Roerich. She did not come seeking the manu-
scripts in order to verify their authenticity or for
any other reason. Plainly, the lamas took the docu-
ments from their safekeeping and brought them to
the ladies on their own initiative.

Madame Caspari, now eighty-five years old,
recently shared her recollection of her journey to
the Himalayas with us and has graciously given us
permission to publish the pictures she and her
husband took along the way—including the photo
of the monk at Himis displaying the books which
he claimed said "your Jesus was here."

Tibet was overrun by the Chinese Commu-
nists in 1950. Since the Chinese suppression of an
uprising in 1959, virtually all the monasteries have
been destroyed or converted to secular uses, while
the lamas have been forced out of religious service.®
If the Pali original of the text was still in Lhasa in
1959, it was probably confiscated or destroyed.

Ladakh is the last remaining refuge of Tibetan
Buddhist culture. Because of its unique geographi-
cal position and some able diplomacy by at least
one of the head abbots, the Himis monastery
avoided destruction by various invading armies and


* CONTENTS

263 CHAPTER FOUR

LEGENDS OF THE EAST

Nicholas Roerich—Excerpts from
Altai-Himalaya, Heart of Asia,

and Himalaya, with original texts on
Saint Issa

264 Photograph of Nicholas Roerich

265 Roerich the Man, His Expedition
and Finds

295 The Ancient Texts on Christ in India,
Nepal, Ladakh, and Tibet

311 CHAPTER FIVE

"THESE BOOKS SAY YOUR JESUS
WAS HERE!"

Elisabeth Caspari s testimony
on the texts at Himis

312 Pholograph of Elisabeth Caspari
313 The Parchment in Hand
319 Photographs by Charles and Elisabeth

Caspari

357 CHAPTER SIX

LADAKH TODAY-IMPRESSIONS OF
A CULTURAL ANTHROPOLOGIST

Dr. Robert S. Ravicz traces the
traditions of life and worship to
the present


J70 ELIZABETH CLARE PROPHET CHAPTER ONE

became a repository for the books, paintings, stat-
uary, costumes, and valued property of the other
convents.

In 1947, Ladakh was closed to outside travelers
by the Indian government because of military ten-
sions with China and Pakistan. But it was reopened
in 1974 and once again it is possible, for anyone
who has the interest, to go to Himis "to see for
himself" whether the documents actually exist— if
they are still there.

A story like this is full of intriguing footnotes.
U.S. Supreme Court Justice William O. Douglas
traveled to Himis in 1951. Describing his experi-
ences in Beyond the High Himalayas, Douglas noted:

Hemis, the first monastery in all of Ladakh,
is still an ideal physical setting for a retreat;
and over the centuries it has become rich
not only in lands and other wealth, but in
legends as well.

One of these apocryphal tales concerns
Jesus. There are those who to this day be-
lieve that Jesus visited the place, that he
came here when he was fourteen and left
when he was twenty-eight, heading west, to
be heard of no more. The legend fills in the
details, saying that Jesus traveled to Hemis
under the name of Issa.°”

In 1975, Dr. Robert S. Ravicz, professor of an-
thropology at California State University, Northridge,


THE LOST YEARS OF JESUS 2 3

made his first journey to Leh. Dr. Ravicz is a
cultural anthropologist with a long-standing in-
terest in South Asia and Latin America. On this
and other visits to India and Ladakh, he lived for
extended periods in monasteries and religious com-
munities and observed the way of life of indigenous
peoples—from their Buddhist practices, weaving
and agricultural methods to their family life. He
met with the Dalai Lama on three occasions and
was familiar with the problems and aspirations of
the people of Tibet.

On this particular journey he was conducting
research on Tibetan refugees and, in the course of
his investigation, visited Himis. While there, he
was told by a friend, an eminent Ladakhi physi-
cian, that it was said there were documents at the
monastery which stated that Jesus had been to
Himis. This was news to Dr. Ravicz, who had
never before heard, nor even suspected, that Jesus
had traveled to the East.

Is it possible to do research at Himis? Yes,
according to Dr. Ravicz, if one were dedicated. In
his opinion, it would take at least several months
for anyone to win the confidence of the lamas
sufficiently to gain access to whatever manuscripts
they might have. And then, in order to be able to
read them, he would have to have a working
knowledge of classical Tibetan.

Although Dr. Ravicz does not claim firsthand
evidence of the books at Himis on the life of Jesus,


he does bear witness to the oral tradition as told to
him by a reputable citizen.%*

Another footnote comes from Edward F.
Noack of Sacramento, California, a world traveler
whose greatest love is journeying to the forbidden
lands of the East. Since 1958 he and his wife,
Helen, have made eighteen expeditions to such
places as Tibet, Nepal, Sikkim, Bhutan, Ladakh,
Afghanistan, Baltistan, China, and Turkestan and
have visited Leh four times.

Noack, age eighty-nine, is a fellow of the
Royal Geographical Society of London and the
California Academy of Sciences. His forthcoming
book, Amidst Ice and Nomads in High Asia, is a
record of his travels in the northwest frontier of
Pakistan, Nagar, Hunza, the Wakhan corridor, and
the rugged Pamir Mountains. Recently Noack told
us that during his stay at Himis in the late seventies
a lama at the monastery informed him that a
manuscript describing Jesus’ pilgrimage to Ladakh
was locked in the storeroom.*%?

And so, just before press time, the final testi-
mony in this chapter of the case for Issa arrives on
our desk from three independent, contemporary
sources: a Supreme Court justice, a cultural anthro-
pologist, and a seasoned traveler. None of them
went to Himis on the trail of the story. But they were
all told that Jesus had been there.

Three more clues at the end of a long search,

*Ravicz and Noack, both prolific photographers, have graciously allowed us to
print some of their choice photographs—including the shot of the monk at
Himis who told Noack of the Issa manuscript.


THE LOST YEARS OF JESUS 2 3

the warmest pieces of evidence in our hands-
evidence that has been unraveling for nearly a
century...

Once again, imagine you are a detective.
This time, it is not a yellowed folder, but a book
that comes across your desk—this book.

Did Jesus go to India during the lost years?
Are the manuscripts and reports of the lamas at
Himis and the accounts of Notovitch, Abheda-
nanda, Roerich, and Caspari accurate and authen-
tic? Are there other explanations for these writings?
Did Jesus spend the lost years in Palestine? Or
Egypt? Or elsewhere?

In order to provide a few clues for your investi-
gation and to assist you in drawing your own
conclusions, we present to you herewith the work
of Nicolas Notovitch, The Unknown Life of Jesus
Christ, including The Life of Saint Issa, with the
author's maps of his travels; the English translation
of the key portions of Swami Abhedananda's In
Kashmir and Tibet, together with his version of the
text;* the reports and writings about Saint Issa
collected in Nicholas Roerichs books Himalaya,
Altai-Himalaya, and Heart of Asia, and sixteen of
his paintings—some of which were painted while
he was on his first Asian expedition; and finally the
able testimony of Elisabeth Caspari on her chance
discovery of the texts with supporting photographs
that she and her husband took on their pilgrimage.
*In the writings of Nicolas Notovitch and Swami Abhedananda we have

reproduced in this book, archaic spellings and punctuation have been updated
where necessary to assist the reader.


VAARLIVIN



Chapter Two

the unknown Life
ofjesus christ

Nicolas Notovitch’s original work,
including The Life of Saint Issa


NICOLAS NOTOVITCH


Translator’s Note

I. translating the travels of Mr. Nicolas Notovitch
in Thibet, The Life of Saint Issa, with the rfsum£
and explanatory notes,* I desire to say that I in no
way adopt or identify myself with the theological
speculations, theories, or controversial points con-
tained in this volume.

I accept in good faith the assurance conveyed
to me by Mr. Notovitch that the "records" of Saint
Issa were discovered by him at the convent Himis,
but I guard myself from expressing any opinion as
to the authenticity or veracity of the document now
presented to the English reader.

I venture, however, to supplement the brief
reference made by Mr. Notovitch to the curious
resemblance which exists between the Catholic
and Thibetan religions.

By reference to the Biographie Universelle,
published at Paris in 1814, I find that Hippolyte
Desideri, a Jesuit priest, visited Thibet in 1715 and
Lassa (Lhasa) in 1716 and that he translated into
Latin the Kangiar or Sahorin, a work which among
[not included in this volume—ED)]


94 NOTOVITCH CHAPTER TWO

the Thibetans has the same authority, so his biog-
rapher says, as the Holy Scriptures among the
Christians. The biographer states that Desideri
applied himself principally to studying the
similarities which seemed to him existent in the
Christian and Thibetan religions.

The earliest known visitor to Thibet was
Father Odoric of Pordenone, who is supposed to
have reached Lassa about the year 1328. He was
followed three centuries later by the Jesuit Antonio
Andrada and in 1661 by Fathers Grueber and
D'Orville.*

The first Englishman known to have entered
Thibet was George Bogle, who, as ambassador of
Warren Hastings, went in 1774 to the lama of
Shigatse. Mr. Bogle remained in Thibet for some
length of time but published no account of his
expedition.

From a letter, however, of Mr. Stewart to
Sir John Pringle* relative to his embassy, it seems
clear that Mr. Bogle had himself been struck by
the similarities which Desideri investigated, as
will be seen from the following passages extracted
from the Encyclopaedia Britannica, vol. 20, 1810,
which I fancy do not appear in the more recent
encyclopedias:

"It is an old notion that the religion of Thibet
is a corrupted Christianity, and even Father

“Encyclopaedia Britannica, 9th ed., s.v. "Tibet."
*Mr. Stewart to Sir John Pringle, Royal Society of London Philosophical Trans-
actions. vol. 67.


THE UNKNOWN LIFE OF JESUS CHRIST 12 3

Desideri, the Jesuit who visited the country about
the beginning of this century (the eighteenth),
thinks he can resolve all their mysteries into our
own, and insists with a truly mystical penetration
that they (the Thibetans) have certainly a good
notion of the Trinity____ The truth is that the
religion of Thibet, from whatever source it sprung,
is pure and simple; in its source, conveying very
exalted notions of the Deity, with no contemptible
system of morality, but in its progress greatly al-
tered and corrupted by worldly men."

Du Halde translated the letters of Hippolyte
Desideri from Italian into French,* and in one
dated from Lassa, April 10, 1716, the priest writes:
"As to their religion, they call God 'Konchok,' and
seem to have a notion of the Trinity, for sometimes
they name Him 'Konchokchik,' or the One God; at
other times, ‘Konchoksum,' or the Trine God.
They use a kind of beads, on which they repeat
Om, Ha, Hum. Om, they say, implies intelli-
gence, or the arm—id est, power; Ha, the word;
and Hum, the heart, or love; and that these three
words signify God."

Grueber the Jesuit and Horace de la Penna,
head of a Capuchin mission, pointed out the
resemblance existing between the religion of the
country and their own.’ Their conjectures were

‘Charles Le Cobien, ed., Lelires edifiantes et curieuses [Edifying and curious
letters], 2 vols, (n.p.: 1707-1709), bk. 15, p. 183.

An account of these proceedings was published at Rome in 1742, entitled
"Relatione del prmcipio e stato present) del vasto Regno del Tibet ed altri due
Regni — consmanti.”



393

405

418

445

CONTENTS

359 Colorful Crossroads of an Ancient
Culture

361 Photographs by Dr. Robert S. Ravicz

and Edward F. Noack
385 Map ofJesus’ Journey to the East

according to Notovitch, Abhedananda,

and Roerich

CHAPTER SEVEN

EPILOGUE
A Tale of Two Worlds

394 Jesus Approaching Ladakh as a Youth

by J. Michael Spooner
395 A Few Final Questions

CHAPTER EIGHT

CREDITS

After the Final Curtain
A Tribute to the Scriptwriter
and the Cast

407 Acknowledgment of Collaborators
NOTES

BIBLIOGRAPHY


96 NOTOVITCH CHAPTER TWO

founded upon: (1) the dress of the lamas, which is not
unlike that of the apostles in ancient paintings;
(2) their subordination, which has some likeness to
the ecclesiastical hierarchy; (3) the resemblance
between certain of their ceremonies and those of
the Roman ritual; (4) their notion of an incarna-
tion; and (5) their maxims of morality.

Gerbillon mentions some of their ceremonies,
as: (1) use of holy water, (2) singing services,
prayers for the dead, and adds: "Their dress is like
that in which the Apostles are painted; they wear
the mitre like bishops; and, further, their Great
Lama, among them, is nearly the same as the
Sovereign Pontiff among the Romanists."*

Grueber goes much farther: he affirms that
although no European or Christian was ever there
before/ yet their religion agrees with the Romish
in all essential points. Thus they celebrate the
Sacrifice of the Mass with bread and wine, give
Extreme Unction, bless married couples, say prayers
over the sick, make processions, honor the relics
of idols (he should have said saints), have monas-
teries and nunneries, sing in the service of the
choir like the Romish monks, observe divers fasts
during the year, undergo most severe penances —
among which whippings—consecrate bishops, and
send out missionaries, who live in extreme poverty
and_travel barefoot through the deserts as far as

‘Jean Baptiste Du Halde, History of China, 2:263. Gerbillon travelled in 1688-
98. Dictionnaire de Gdographie Universelle, s.v. "Tibet."
*This seems an error of Crueber's, which was corrected by Thivenot, his collector.



THE UNKNOWN LIFE OF JESUS CHRIST 12 3

China. "These things," adds Grueber, "I was an
eyewitness of."*

Even this wonderful combination of simi-
larities is not all. Friar Horace de la Penna—who is
not, however, so much to be trusted—says:

"In the main the religion of Thibet is the
counterpart of the Romish. They believe in one
God and a Trinity, in paradise, hell, and purga-
tory; make suffrages, alms, prayers, and sacrifices
for the dead; have a number of convents filled with
monks and friars/ who, besides the three vows of
poverty, obedience, and charity, make several
others. They have confessors, who are chosen by
their Superiors, and receive their licences from a
Lama or from a bishop, without which they cannot
hear confessions* or impose penances. They use
holy-water, crosses, and beads."

Monsieur Hue, who travelled in Thibet in
1844-46, refers to the affinities between the
Lamanesque worship and Catholicism:

"The cross, the mitre, the dalmatica; the
cope, which the Grand Lamas wear on their jour-
neys; the service with double choirs; the psalmody,
the exorcisms; the censer, suspended from five
chains; the benedictions, the chaplet, ecclesiasti-
cal celibacy, spiritual retirement, the worship of

"

*Jean de Th*venot, "Grueber's Letters," in Voyages de M. de Thivenot en Europe.
Asie & Afrique [The Voyages of M. de Thdvenot in Europe, Asia & Africa],
5 vols. (Paris: Angot, 1689), 4:18+.

*Desideri says they have the monastic life and the tonsure.

(Andrada says they use a sort of confession among themselves.

INouvelle bibliotheque 14 (Jan.-Mar. 1743): 55+.


98 NOTOVITCH CHAPTER TWO

the saints; the fasts, the processions, the litanies,
the holy-water—all these are analogies between the
Buddhists and ourselves.

"Now, can it be said that these analogies are of
Christian origin? We think so. We have indeed
found, neither in the traditions nor in the monu-
ments of the country, any positive proof of their
adoption; still it is perfectly legitimate to put for-
ward conjectures which possess all the characteris-
tics of the most emphatic probability.”*

Reference to Pinkerton's Travels, vol. 7, under
head "A Description of Thibet,” will show that
"several missionaries have imagined that in the
ancient books of the Lamas some traces remain of
the Christian religion, which, as they think, was
preached there in the time of the Apostles.”*

However that may be, and without entering
on the debatable ground of affinities of rites, cere-
monies, and observances which may have been
pagan in their origin or Romanistic in inception, it
may be urged for Mr. Notovitch, as a reason for
admitting the genuineness of his discovery, that
the two churches might in fact have had one
common origin and that if in the time of the
apostles—as contended by the missionaries—the

sEveriste Regis Hue, Travels in Tartary, Thibet, and China, 1844-1846. trans.
William Hazlitt (London: n.d ).

*St. Bartholomew. It is thought this apostle travelled as far as India to propagate
the Gospel; for Eusebius relates that a famous philosopher and Christian named
Pantaenus found there, among those who yet retained the knowledge of Christ,
the Gospel of St. Matthew written out, as the tradition states, by St. Bar-
tholomew, one of the twelve apostles. There is mention made of a Gospel of
St. Bartholomew in the preface to Origen's Homilies, but it is generally looked
upon as spurious and is placed by Pope Celasius among the Apocryphal books.


THE UNKNOWN LIFE OF JESUS CHRIST 12 3

Gospel was preached to the Thibetans, nothing is
more natural than that the companions of Christ,
who must have learned from him how and where
the wonderful gap in his life was passed, should
have desired to visit and did visit the scene of their
Master's early labors. The limit of a translator's
note prevents my entering into such discussion,
and I leave the speculation to others.

I have translated The Life of Saint Issa literally
but have taken more license with the personal part
of Mr. Notovitch's narrative.

VIOLET CRISPE

HOTEL DES ALPS,
LAC DE GENEVE, TERRITET,
February 1, 1895


To the Publishers

Sirs,

I am pleased to hear that you have decided on
publishing a translation in English of my work, The
Unknown Life of Jesus Christ, which appeared in
French for the first time in the beginning of last year.

This translation is not a literal transcript of
the French edition. Through unavoidable exigen-
cies connected with its publication, my book was
first brought out with an amount of haste which
has been much to its detriment. I had only five
days allowed me to draw up the preface, introduc-
tion, and rgsum6, and barely a few hours to correct
the proofs.

This must account for a certain paucity of
proof in support of some of my assertions, some
gaps in the narrative, and many printers’ errors
which my adversaries have loudly proclaimed
without perceiving that in their overrighteous zeal
to lop off suckers and to draw attention to any
blemishes in the bark, they only demonstrate their
own powerlessness to attack the trunk itself of the
tree I have planted, which defies the hardest blows
to lay it low.


THE UNKNOWN LIFE OF JESUS CHRIST 12 3

Indeed, they have rendered me a service for
which I now tender my grateful thanks, as they
have facilitated a rehandling of the subject which
I should myself have deemed indispensable. I am
always glad to avail myself of any information and
am not so infatuated with the Oriental knowledge
which I possess, not to be aware that I have still a
great deal to learn.

The English public will, therefore, be the first
to profit by those well-grounded criticisms which
I have accepted and the corrections which I should
have made spontaneously.

I thus offer to the English reader a book
purged from all offense and free from any of the
inexactness of detail with which I have been re-
proached so bitterly and with somewhat puerile
persistence, as in the case of a certain Chinese
emperor whose dynasty I had erroneously stated
and whom I have relegated to his proper chrono-
logical rank.

It has been my aim and desire that the English
public, whose intelligence is so keen but whose
susceptibilities are always on the alert against any
new thing, especially if it happen to be a religious
novelty, should be able to judge of the work on its
intrinsic merits and not from the grammatical or
typographical errors on which my detractors have
relied up to this moment to weaken the full import
of my document. I hope, above all, that after
having read the work it will be conceded that I have
written it in perfect good faith.


102 NOTOVITCH CHAPTER TWO

I am well aware that a skillfully devised criti-
cism has prejudiced the public beforehand against
the book. And although generously defended by
known and unknown friends, The Unknown Life of
Jesus Christ has been so rancorously attacked by
zealots who seemed to imagine that I desired to
inaugurate a theological controversy (whereas my
sole aim was to contribute another stone to the
edifice of modern science) that it makes its first
appearance in England enveloped in an atmosphere
of mistrust.

Everything has been urged that could invali-
date the authenticity of my documents. But the
attack has been principally directed against the
author, impugning his honor as a writer, doubtless
in the hope that such insults would have the effect
of disturbing his calm attitude and causing him to
utter sentiments which would militate against the
book itself.

I could treat injurious accusations with con-
tempt: insults are not reasons, even when advanced
in the tone of affected moderation which charac-
terizes Mr. Max Miiller's attempt to demolish me.
But I shall, nevertheless, take up those which relate
to my sojourn in Thibet, at Leh, at Ladak, and at
the Buddhist monastery of Himis. I will first briefly
resume the objections which have been advanced
relative to the means of verifying the authenticity
of my document.

It was objected: Why does the lama of Himis re-
fuse to answer in the affirmative the questions which


THE UNKNOWN LIFE OF JESUS CHRIST 12 3

have been put to him as to the manuscripts? Because
Orientals are in the habit of looking upon Europeans
as robbers who introduce themselves in their midst
to despoil them in the name of civilization.

That I succeeded in having these narratives
communicated to me was because I made use of
the Eastern diplomacy which I had learnt in my
travels. I knew how to approach from afar the
question which interested me, whilst everybody
now asks point-blank questions.

The lama says to himself, "If these manu-
scripts are asked for, it is to carry them off," so he
naturally holds aloof and refuses any explanation.
This prudence is easy to understand when one
remarks the procedure of those Europeans who, in
contact with Orientals, only make use of civiliza-
tion to plunder them and commit the most bare-
faced robberies.

A lady writes to Europe that I "have never
been seen out there" and that no one has ever
heard my name. Upon which the pack of janitors
of the temple declare that I never set foot in
Thibet; in other words, that I am an impostor.

A Moravian missionary, the worthy Mr. Shaw,
repeats this little joke, which I must call childish;
and then the seekers after Truth add his testimony to
the rest and renew the insulting accusation. It is true
that since then Mr. Shaw has loyally withdrawn it.

It costs me not a little to defend myself on this
point, but I must not let the error go unrefuted and
gain ground. Ifthe English lady in question and her


104 NOTOVITCH CHAPTER TWO

friends never came across me, I can cite Lieutenant
Younghusband, whom I met at Matayan on October
28, 1887, and who was the first to cross China and
ascend the Mustagh Pass at an elevation of 21,500
feet (English), also many others.

I still possess a photograph of the sympathetic
governor of Ladak, Surajbal, with an inscription
written in his own hand and which I reproduce in
this volume.

I was even attended in my illness at Ladak by a
European physician in the service of the English
government, Dr. Karl Marx, whose letter of
November 4, 1887, you have seen. Why not write
directly to him to ascertain whether or not I was
actually in Thibet, as they seem to desire so
earnestly to prove the contrary? It is true that it
takes some little time to write out and get a reply
from Thibet; but still letters are sent there, and
answers come back.

It has also been alleged that the manuscript of
The Unknown Life of Jesus Christ never existed at
all in the convent of Himis and that I simply
evolved the whole from my imagination. This is
indeed an honor I do not deserve, for my imagina-
tion is not so fertile.

If even I had been capable of inventing a
romance of this magnitude, common sense alone
would point out that I should have heightened the
value of such an invention by attributing my dis-
covery to some mysterious or supernatural inter-
vention and should have abstained from stating


THE UNKNOWN LIFE OF JESUS CHRIST 12 3

precisely the locality, the date, and the circum-
stances of the discovery. In any case, I should
hardly have limited my own share in the matter to
that of simply transcribing certain old manuscripts.

I have also been held up to ridicule as a butt of
the facetious lamas, as was the case it appears with
Willfor and M. Jacolliot; that, not being sufficiently
on my guard against certain Indian forgers who live
by taking advantage of European credulity, I ac-
cepted as ready money—even as gold ingots—what
was only some ingenious false coinage.

It is Mr. Max Miiller who lays the greatest
stress on this accusation. Now, as Mr. Max Miiller
enjoys a reputation in the scientific world, I owe it
to myself and the public to refute him at a little
greater length than the rest of my critics.

Mr. Max Miiller's principal argument seems to
consist in saying that the narrative of The Unknown
Life of Jesus Christ as I have transcribed it in this
book is neither to be found in the catalogued tables
of the Tanjur, nor in those of the Kanjur.

I would here observe that if it were so, my
discovery would be neither a curious nor a rare
one, as these catalogues have long since been open
to the investigations of European scholars and that
the first Orientalist who chose to do so could easily
have done what I did—go to Thibet, provided with
his guidebook, and extract from the rolls of parch-
ment the passages indicated by the catalogue.

According to Mr. Max Miiller's own state-
ment, these tables contain a list of about two


