

#



ww | sikhbooke!uh.com
nine ne mri tance tetas tiainaah

WALKING WITH NANAK
$2

. .» 18 Fe was well-versed in ar:
writers and artists from all over. He was well-versed in ancient |p

ca tales with a foc stort tein
texts and rewrote some of these tales with a focus on stories that .
xts a

legends of deities defeating demons and restoring the moral balang
the world. Perhaps Guru Gobind saw his own destiny In these legeng
In his writings, Guru Gobind also justified the rise of the Sodhj Cath n
become the Gurus of the Sikh community, replacing the Bedig.19 CQ "
Nanak belonged to the Bedi caste. At his deathbed, he did not aPpai,
his son as the next Guru but one of his favourite disciples, who bee
famous as Guru Angad. Guru Angad also followed the tradition of Nang,
by bypassing his progeny and appointing a disciple. However, SOON afte,
the appointment to the seat of Guru became a family affair, in which
the Sodhi caste dominated. Using ancient history, Guru Gobind Singh
explained how the Sodhis replaced the Bedis.

The Guru does so in his work called Vichitr Natak which forms ,
portion of the Daswan Padshah ka Granth.” In this, Guru Gobind Singh
talks about how there was a descendant of the earlier rulers of India,
called Sodhi Rai, whose descendants came to be known as Sodhis. Some
of their descendants, who engaged in conflict but survived, went to Kashi
to master the four Vedas and came to be known as Bedis.2! Once, the
Bedis were invited by the king of Madar Des which was ruled by the
descendants of the Sodhis. Here, the Bedis recited the four Vedas. The
King was so impressed by their recitation that he renounced the throne
in their favour. The Bedis, in response, vowed they ‘would return the
compliment in Kaliyuga when their descendant Nanak would raise the
Sodhis to a prime position in the world’.22
eee ete me an eu oe Sing
Granth Sahib. It is said that of whee ‘s ne ning ae a a
Guru himself bowed in front of the hottie samme

of the book and instructed his followers

18 . .
Cunningham, 4 History of the Sikhs, page 121-131

19
Grewal, Four Centuries of Sikh Tradition, page 163

20

Cunningham, 4 History of the Sikhs, page 114
“Ibid., page 163
Ibid.


ecw sikh Bookclub com

GURU GOBIND SINGH 83

that after his death the living word of the Gurus compiled in the Granth
would be the eternal Guru of the Khalsa. Through this, Guru Gobind
ended the long line of Gurus. | | ,
Every time I come across a poster that contains the pictures of a ;
the Sikh Gurus I cannot help but notice the evolution of the seat °t
Guru through generations. In all the pictures I have come across, poe
and Gobind are always the most prominent ones with the size ot t or
images bigger than that of the other Gurus. Going one by one t ough
the pictures of each individual Guru, one cannot help Pat netce I ‘
the garb of subsequent Gurus changed. The simple clothes ° > ana and
Angad slowly make way for the elaborate silks of H sepia a ne
Rai. The prince of princes is Guru Gobind Singh, at the end of the line,

the ninth incarnation of Guru Nanak.


4 _gihbookeluls.< om,
eel

THE JOURNEY BEGINS

Nanak’s eyes fell on the worn-out clothes of the carpenter. His shirt wa;
tattered and patched with mismatched pieces of cloth. The turban op
his head was soiled. He wore no shoes. Sweat glistened on his forehead
Nanak looked past him, into his house and saw that there was no window,
The emptiness of his house stood out in the darkness that surrounded
it. The carpenter was holding a hammer in his hand and was older than
Nanak. His moustache was untrimmed, while stubble from the past
several days sat like an unwelcome guest on his face. Nanak was delighted
to find his man.

“We are travellers,’ interjected Bhai Mardana, trying to break the
awkward silence. “Would it be possible for you to provide us with food
and a place to stay for the night?’

The curiosity in the carpenter's eyes intensified. Without saying
anything, he moved away from the door, allowing his guests to enter
He knew that he had neither food nor enough bedding for the three of
them but he still couldn't help but let these holy men in.

Nanak and Mardana stepped into the darkness of the room. It took
them a few minutes to be able to see clearly and when they saw that
there was no furniture but a charpoy resting on one of the walls, a rolle
up mattress next to it and a few clay utensils in a niche in the wall, there
was no doubt in their minds that they had arrived at the poorest house
at Saidpur.


Ww

Ww.sikhbookclub.com,

THE JOURNEY BEGINS 85

Vhile walking j i i i
a uns into this ancient city, both Nanak and Mardana were
surprised to see the magnificent houses and havelis all around. These
were unlike any they had ever seen. There were huge temples, their tall

structures decorated with gold tridents rising from the middle of these
structures. This was a busy city, with buyers and sellers haggling over
prices. It was from here that trading goods spread into the other regions
of the Punjab and went further east. In every shop, Nanak noticed
the idols of Hindu gods. Laxmi, the goddess of fortune was the most
popular, followed by Ganesh, the son of Lord Shiva. Throughout the
negotiations, the traders kept referring to the gods and goddesses to
make false promises about their profit margins and the quality of their
material. In the evening, after closing their shops, most traders would
visit their favourite temples to thank the gods for their blessings. In
return for their favour the traders would donate exorbitant amounts of
money to these temple complexes.

Saidpur was an ancient city. No one could date with any authority
the origin of this city, but there were legends that the temples here had
been built thousands of years ago, long before the birth of Islam. Over
the years, these temples had been renovated and expanded. By the time
Nanak and Mardana arrived, they had become huge complexes that
included not only the shrine but also rooms for pilgrims and shops that
had been leased out to traders. Cows and other animals were tied up in
the stables of these temples and there was an army of servants employed
to make sure that these Houses of God were well looked after.

There was always a long line of devotees waiting to be ushered into
the temples. These comprised the gentry of Saidpur, the aristocrats and
traders. Despite their remarkable material success, here at the temple,
they were treated as ordinary citizens. If anyone broke the line, they
were strongly rebuked by the assistants of the Brahmin pandits. Here,
the Brahmin pandits were the bosses. Vast quantities of clothes, food
and jewellery was offered at the temples, the majority of which was kept
by the temple and distributed to its workers; the remaining was sold to
make sure that the running cost of the temples was covered.

Outside each of these temples, Nanak and Mardana noticed an even
larger line of naked and starving beggars. Devotees returning from the


at

wl’ vy siknbookclub-cl n,

6

temples offe ' !
cemple who made sure the naked and starving beggars did not ente, th

premises of t rnish
This was a Hindu-majority city
Most of the Hindu occupants here were traders, while the Muslims Wore

aristocrats. It is for this reason that over the years Saidpur had Merged
as one of the most important trading centres between the Chenab and
the Ravi. After Delhi and Lahore, this was the most important Stop for
traders. Traders and travellers arriving from the West also made sure
that they stopped at Saidpur, which had some of the tallest temples jn
the Punjab and also the most beautiful courtesans.

Walking through the streets of Saidpur and observing the religious
practices of its people, Nanak realised that religion here was another
commodity that was sold. The businessmen and traders who had amassed
extraordinary profits after exploiting the farmers and labourers bought
their piety from the threshold of these temples, while the Brahmins
sold it. There were many mendicants, ascetics, fakirs and Sufis roaming
around the streets, singing their religious songs. They too flocked around
rich merchants every time they left their shops or exited the temples. In
this city of business, Nanak knew that it would be almost impossible to
find honesty. He knew that he, like these fake fakirs could flatter one of
the rich merchants and get food and a place to sleep for the night, but
that’s not what they had left their home for. Nanak wanted to search
for honesty in this dishonest world and it was for this reason that he
decided to knock on the poorest house in Saidpur, where he knew that
even if they didn’t find lavish meals or comfortable bedding, they would
at least find sincerity, humility, hospitality and honesty.

Nanak and Mardana seated themselves on a floor mat that the
carpenter had spread on the floor for them. Nanak told him they wet
travellers in search of honesty, which had brought them to this city 49
his house.

‘T used to be in charge of the food store at the court of the Diwa"
of Sultanpur before I realised that life in this world was a tempot‘y
state and therefore should not be wasted in amassing wealth, which is
eventually of no use to the person. After having realised this, I decide

he temple and tarnish its sanctity.
with a few Muslim househo| ds


www, sikhbookclub.com

THE JOURNEY BEGINS 87

to quit my job, take up this garb and travel the world in search of Truth,’
said Nanak.

During the conversation, Nanak learnt that the name of the carpenter
was Lalo, Lalo could not read or write but was eager for education. Often,
as a child, he had wished that he had been born into the household of
a rich man in one of the many havelis that stood tall in Saidpur, to be
taught Persian and Arabic like the children of the aristocrats. He would
stare at their carriages as they left their shiny houses and entered the
houses of their rich teachers, in longing. Often as a child, he would make
an excuse to his father who had started training him to be a carpenter
and loiter outside the havelis of the rich teachers, hoping to catch the
sound of a lesson that he could memorise. His father, either aware of his
son's curiosity or out of sheer indifference, allowed Lalo to shirk work.

With age, Lalo’s dreams of getting an education receded to the
background. As he learned to make beautiful furniture out of plain wood,
he also learned to shape the audacity of his dreams to settle in line with
the realities of his life. He submitted to karma, so to say. Passing each day
against the odds of poverty and all its proxies became his sole ambition.

In his lifetime Lalo had come across several dervish and jogis but
never anyone like Nanak. Firstly, he had never had such a comprehensive
encounter with any. They ignored him every time he walked around the
streets of Saidpur. Songs and lectures would usually stop when Lalo was
around, not because they didn’t want him to hear it, but because he was
invisible to them, cloaked as he was in poverty. They would respond with
a smile when once or twice Lalo put in a coin or two into their begging
bowls. That’s all the interaction he ever got.

While Lalo sat there listening to Nanak’s discourse about caste
and the ‘business’ of religion, he tried figuring out Nanak’s religious
denomination. Usually by looking at the clothes of a dervish, one could
identify his religious identity. Red was preferred by Hindu ascetics; while
Muslims wore green. Muslims wore a skull cap while Hindu ascetics left
their hair open. Nanak on the other hand, wore a long choga (cloak) just
like the Muslim dervish but it wasn't green. Instead, it was red. There
was a white belt around his waist similar to the dress of the fakirs, while

there was a cap on his head, partially covered by a turban. He wore


Ww sikhbookclub.c om
ee eid
88 WALKING WITH NANAK

wooden sandals, something that was favoured by religious
denominations. Looking at his garb, Lalo could Not figure out of a
person standing in front of him was a Hindu or a Muslim th

It was actually a conscious effort by Nanak to dilut
identity, which is why he had adopted a garb that incorporated ‘ Oy,
from the clothes of all religious traditions. During his time at 5 tla
Nanak had realised that it was these distinctions between di fen
religious traditions, particularly Hinduism and Islam that Prod
such tension in society. At Sultanpur, his philosophy had Caused much
controversy.

He had been sent to Sultanpur by his father on the request of Beh.
Nanaki and her husband; there he was able fo secure the job of th
storekeeper at the court of the Governor of Sultanpur, Daulat Lodhj

Khan. Nanak’s hard work and honesty had earned him respect in the
eyes of the governor but there were other powerful nobles in the cou
who wanted to get rid of him. So when they found out about Nanak’
unorthodox statement, ‘There is no Hindu, no Muslim’, they were quick
to pounce on it and create all sorts of controversies. Initially, Nanak was
able to ward off the blows but eventually these attacks became much
more personal. A couple of times it was alleged that Nanak was stealing
from the treasury of the governor, but when an audit was conducted, the
accounts were shown to be in perfect order.

In the meantime, Nanak, having experienced travel and a professional
life, also came of age, and his Philosophy attained a greater stability
and coherence. Soon after his arrival at Sultanpur he was joined by his
best friend from Talwindi, Mardana, a Muslim Mirasi (a community
of genealogists and bards) who had ignited within Nanak a passion fot
music. Initially, Nanak’s and Mardana’s friendship had caused a lot of
anxiety to Nanak’s family, who regarded Mardana as an untouchable
Mirasi but given that the list of ‘disappointments’ from Nanak was long,
this was a minor issue.

At Sultanpur, both Nanak and Mardana started a ritual together
which was to become a daily feature for them for the rest of their nn
and also for the Sikh community. Every night after work, Mardana woul i
Pick up his rubab, while Nanak would sing his poetry to the classic
tunes that the Muslim bard played.

€ his relio;



™ a
“W:silkhbookclub.com

THE JOURNEY BEGINS 89

It was also in Sultanpur that Nanak bec
a poet and started composing
share his poems with anyone

ame much more confident as
and reciting regularly. Initially, he wouldn't
alee » but gradually on Mardana’s insistence, who
detected poetic genius in the young poet, Nanak began singing

Nanak’s popularity as a poet and spiritual guide spread through the
streets of Sultanpur and to smaller villages and cities on the outskirts.
Every night, the audience around Nanak and Mardana grew. His audience
included both Hindus and Muslims. Nanak was becoming incre
aware of his purpose in life.

On the one hand, his popularity was spreading, on the other hand,
the Muslim nobles at the court of the Governor, who were already upset
about Nanak’s high status in court and his unorthodox religious views,
started to plot against him. They thought of several schemes to get rid of
Nanak but all of them failed because Daulat Lodhi Khan had immense
respect for him.

However, as his audience grew, Nanak realised that nothing brought
him more joy in life than this spiritual quest that Nanak and Mardana
had begun through their spiritual songs. His interest in his work
decreased and he soon came to the conclusion that it would be unfair
to the governor to keep on continuing in this half-hearted manner. He
decided to head back to Talwindi with his best friend, Mardana.

At Talwindi, Mehta Kalu was disappointed that his son had
abandoned such a lucrative job. He could not understand his son's
new-found passion for singing his religious songs in every corner of
the world. Mehta Kalu wanted to scold him and forbid him from doing
so but he was also aware of the fact that Nanak was no longer a boy
but a fully grown man and such harsh methods would achieve nothing
but alienation. So, a few days after his arrival at Talwindi, when Nanak
expressed the desire to leave for his religious journey, Mehta Kalu said
nothing.

Nanak would have liked his father to bless him on his new-found
mission in life but he was also willing to accept his silence as long as he
did not show vehement opposition. In this way, soon after their return
from Sultanpur, both Nanak and Mardana left on another journey. They

had no idea where they were going, when they were going to return or

in public,

asingly


"bd v.sikhbookclub.< om
nn eenseemeneniaenmammmemaaiinaaiaienl

90 WALKING WITH NANAK
what they would eat or drink. They were leaving from Talwin
nothing but a small bundle thrown over their shoulders,

In this situation, all Sulakhni and her two children could do
stand at the threshold of their home watching Nanak and Mart”®
walk away. Sulakhni wanted to run to her husband and beg him nce
abandon them, but she couldn't do that. Mehta Kalu and Mata Tr to
were standing next to her, crying quietly. Both Sri Chand and Laker a
Das were unaware of the gravity of the situation. ‘They were eager to .
back into the household and play with their toys but their mothe; had
forced them to say goodbye to their father. Reluctantly, they stood there
at the threshold of the door, watching their father leave while the rest of
the household cried quietly.

It was as if Sulakhni, Mata Tripta and Mehta Kalu wanted to keep
their tears hidden from each other. Even though none of them fully
supported what Nanak was doing, they all understood his passion and
free-spirited soul. They knew that this was a big step for Nanak and fel
that they should not make this auspicious day an inauspicious one by
their tears.

Both Nanak and Mardana did not know that they would not return
to a sedentary life for twenty-four years and that they would travel
thousands of kilometres, that too on foot. They had no idea that they
would become two of the most widely travelled people not only of their
era but even the modern era. They especially did not know that through
the course of their journey they would change the history of the world,
giving birth to a new religious movement that would eventually have
millions of followers. Had they known the gravity of their undertaking,
perhaps, they would never have set foot outside Talwindi. They were able
to achieve greatness only by remaining in the dark about their destiny.
Even at the time of their deaths, Nanak and Mardana did not know
what they had achieved.

As younger men, both Nanak and Mardana had wanted to visit
Saidpur, a city they had heard so much about. This was the city with
the grandest Hindu temples. The priests here were said to be the wisest.
The idols here were the most expensive. The prasad at these temples w?°
rumoured to be the sweetest. It is for this reason that Nanak first decide

to head towards Saidpur after leaving Talwindi.

di With


Wwww.sikhbookclub.com

Re

THE JOURNEY BEGINS a

‘1s there anything to eat, Bhai Lalo?’ Mardana asked, interrupting
Nanak's speech. Nanak did not seem to mind the interruption and looked
towards Lalo as if he too was asking for food. Lalo went to one corner
of the house where he busied himself searching for something. After a
little while Nanak realised that there wasn't really anything to eat in the
house and Lalo was using the time to come up with a reasonable excuse.

‘Why don't you serve us that dry roti on top of that cloth?’ said Nanak,
pointing to something near where Bhai Lalo was sitting.

‘Please, Guruji. Don’t embarrass me. I’ll make you fresh roti with
some daal if you could only allow me some time to look for the flour.’

‘No, Bhai Lalo. I insist that you give us that dried-up roti. That is
all we need.’

Without further arguments, Lalo served his guests two dried up
rotis and instead of daal, gave them water. Both Mardana and Nanak
soaked their roti in the water and seemed to relish the meal. After they
were finished Lalo dared to ask what had been on his mind since both
of them had shown up at his door unannounced.

‘Guruji, there are several notables living here in Saidpur. You must
have seen that haveli of Malik Bhago on the way.’

Nanak nodded. The four-storey haveli known as the Shahi Qilla at
Saidpur was hard to miss. Torches had been lit from the middle of the
city, leading into the haveli. Bearers had been dispatched with messages
fom the Hindu minister that all Brahmins and members of the high
castes had been invited to the haveli to celebrate the wedding of Malik
Bhago’s son. Curious at the proceedings, Nanak had asked someone on
the street about Malik Bhago. They had told him that he was a minister
of the Rai of Saidpur. From the gossip on the street he had also learned
that Malik Bhago was stealing from the treasury of the King. Initially,
Nanak dismissed what he heard as hearsay but when he saw the haveli
he realised the reason for the gossip. It was a magnificent structure, the
largest in the city. There were several frescoes on the external walls of the
haveli, while guards stood at all windows and doors. Hearing about the
feast, Mardana had suggested that they should also attend it, since Nanak
was from a high-caste, but Nanak refused to enter Malik Bhago’s haveli.

‘Today is the wedding of the son of Malik Bhago and he has opened


—

| nn ee
> oOo OA N BD nN FP W NY FF CO

. The Prophecy
. Walking with the Guru

0 ON DH FW NH

Www.sikhbookclub.com
etme |

Introduction

An Encounter with Divinity

. Guru Gobind Singh

. The Journey Begins

. Southwards

. Guru Tegh Bahadur

. The Inspiration

. A Cursed Lot

. Guru Harkrishan

. Two Paisas Worth of Truth
. An Unmarked Grave

. Guru Har Rai

. Not Hindu Enough

. Guru Hargobind

. The Shiva of My Imagination
. Guru Arjan

. The Legend

. Guru Ram Das

. Religio-commercialisation

i ee

23

41

76

84
101
114
120
139
154
158
178
184
188
205
210
226
232
246
250


_yeas.sikpbookclub.c om

WALKING WITH NANAK

92
his doors to all high-caste Hindus,’continued ne ‘Why didn’t You »,
there, instead of coming to my humble abode: ane don't take Offer
at my question. I dont suggest this because your arrival has broughe .
any displeasure. I am elated that I have received the Opportunity to ser
you. There is no one in Saidpur besides me who can boast of havin,
hosted an honest sadhu. I only say this because I don't understand we
you would want to eat dried-up roti instead of a lavish feast.’
‘These people think they can buy religion by feeding a few hungr,
Brahmins. What should I say about the character of these Brahming
Feeding off the money of the corrupt, they bless them, Promising thy,
all their sins will be washed away. The food being served inside js not
made out of bread or other eatables. It is made out of the blood of th.
hard-working people who toil under the blazing sun all day to receive,
paltry sum, instead of their due share. I would never be able to live with
myself if I too joined these Brahmins and sold my religion at the doorstep
of Malik Bhago. Maybe I'll be able to explain myself better in poetry:

There are ignoble among the noblest

And pure among the despised

The former shall though avoid

And be the dust under the foot of the other.?3

‘Guruji, please excuse me once again for I do not understand your fancy
verse. I am an uneducated person. Could you please explain what you
said to me in a lay person’s words?”

‘Bhai Lalo, you say that Malik Bhago has opened his house today for
members of high castes and that I should have gone there. I have told
you already that I do not believe in the institution of caste. For me all
castes and religions are the same. You, Mardana and I, we are all of the
same caste. How then can I pretend to be a member of a high caste just
to feed my stomach? Secondly, I ask you, prior to this has Malik Bhago
ever opened his doors to the starving? He has done so today because it
is the wedding of his child and he needs the prayers of the Brahmins.
He exhibits no compassion but rather selfish motives. Tomorrow, when

nenmertteeainienenfaastesttinin tyes pee. anda reenyt iin yo

“Dhillon, The First Sikh Spiritual Master, page 75

ae


Ww

W.sikhbookclub.com

THE JOURNEY BEGINS 93
his purpose * achieved, he will once again shut those doors and all those
Brahmins will be thrown out. My final objection is: why doesn't he also
seek the blessings of the low castes? Does God not listen to their prayers?
Had he opened his doors to everyone in the city, I swear by God, ] would
have gone to the feast. But because this was an exclusive gathering, | did
not think myself worthy of going to such a place.’

All through the evening Lalo kept asking Nanak questions and
Nanak kept answering them. He asked questions about the Hindu
pantheon, about Muslim Sufis, about the places that Nanak had been
to, about the occult science of magic, about the jungles of Punjab and
the bandits residing in them. Nanak was the perfect teacher, replying
patiently, satisfied at the curiosity of his young student.

At night, before sleeping, according to the tradition that had been
established at Sultanpur, Mardana took out his rubab while Nanak started
to sing his poetry. Lalo felt mesmerised at the husky voice of this Bhakti
saint. As the world prepared to sleep, the sound of Nanak’s music travelled
to every street of the city, whispering in the ears of sleeping people. ‘Wake
up.’ ‘Follow the sound, it said, and throngs of people headed towards
Lalo’s house to hear the songs of Guru Nanak and Bhai Mardana.

Nanak stayed at Saidpur for a few days and every night he would
sing his poems. He became the topic of conversation in the bazaar of
the city. Whereas there was a group of people who could not help praise
the voice and the poems of the spiritual leader, there were others who
were offended by his message. “He says that he is neither a Hindu nor
a Muslim,’ said one of them. ‘Who is he then? He says he is a man of
God but what sort of religious man is he if he does not believe in any
religion? I say he is a fraud who is only here to deceive people.’

‘That could be true. He chooses to live in the house of that world-
rejected Lalo to attract attention. He wanted to do something odd so
that he could attract the attention of people.’

The bazaar gossip also reached the ears of the tyrannical Hindu
minister. As is the case with those who attempt to buy off religion, Malik
Bhago too was easily offended in matters of religion. ‘Bring that infidel
to me,’ he said to his guards.

Nanak was brought to his court and asked about his whereabouts.

gree


We eokclub.com
vww.sikhbookclub

WALKING WITH NANAK
94
, idn’t you come to my feast»
du. Why then di ase
“You are a ae choose to eat at the house of ; catpentes
Malik nae se your food is prepared out of the blood of your Stbjec,
ieee Lalo’s food is cooked in the milk of honesty.
while

9

In the Janamsakhis that record Nanak’s life story, the sateen betwee

ak and Bhai Lalo is one of the most important t = e Janamsakhj,
Nan iled at least sixty-five years after Nanak’s death, and Were
collected by people who were devotees. It is believed that several Miracles
and stories were inserted into the Janamsakhis to give Nanak a larger
than-life personality. For example, the story that mentions Nanak;
interaction with the Hindu minister, Malik Bhago, says that When Nanak
appeared before him, he took a piece of bread from Bhago’s feast and
when he squashed it, blood started to ooze out of it. When he did the
same with Bhai Lalo’s bread, milk came out. “That’s because his food has
been earned with hard work while yours has been earned by exploiting
the people,’ Nanak is reported to have said.

I am not even sure if Nanak ever met with Malik Bhago. For me,
the personality of Malik Bhago comes across as too tyrannical to allow
Nanak to leave unharmed after he had insulted him in his haveli. Perhaps
this version of the story, where Nanak and Malik Bhago meet, was an
insertion from one of Nanak’s devotees. According to the legend, after
Nanak’s interaction with Malik Bhago, the minister was so humbled that
he not only let Nanak leave but also realised Nanak’s spiritual depth.

It is ironic to hear of stories in which miracles are associated with
Nanak. Immersing myself in his philosophy, I have come to the conclusion
that Nanak was repulsed by the concept of making a larger-than-life
figure out of a religious leader. He spoke
being associated with them. To me, he co
learnt early on in his life that most of th
and shrines are exactly that, myths.
the devotees of Nanak asked him i
said the following:

vehemently against miracles
mes across as a rationalist who
€ myths associated with saints
It is recorded that once when one of
f he could perform miracles, Nanak


Ww

~“twsikhbookclub.com

THE JOURNEY BEGINS 95

Dwell then in flame uninjured,

Remain unharmed amid eternal ice,

Make blocks of stone thy food,

Spurn the solid earth before thee

With thy foot,

Weigh the heavens in a balance

Then ask thou that Nanak perform wonders.”4

The beauty of Nanak’s poetry lies in his sarcasm. Babur Bani was the
first poem of Nanak that I read. It is believed that Nanak wrote this
poem when the first Mughal Emperor from Kabul crossed the Indus
and attacked India. As a reflection of the devastation caused by the
conquering army, Nanak writes:

As the Word of the Forgiving Lord comes to me,

so do I express it, O Lalo.

Bringing the marriage party of sin,

Babar has invaded from Kabul,

demanding our land as his wedding gift, O Lalo.
Modesty and righteousness both have vanished,
and falsehood struts around like a leader, O Lalo.
The Qazis and the Brahmins have lost their roles,
and Satan now conducts the marriage rites, O Lalo.
The Muslim women read the Koran,

and in their misery, they call upon God, O Lalo.
‘The Hindu women of high social status,

and others of lowly status as well,

are put into the same category, O Lalo.

The wedding songs of murder are sung, O Nanak,
and blood is sprinkled instead of saffron, O Lalo.
Nanak sings the Glorious Praises of the Lord and Master in the city of
corpses,

and voices this account.

‘Dhillon, The First Sikh Spiritual Master, page vii (Introduction)


be, ichbockciuh com

% WALKING WITH NANAK

The One who created, and attached the mortals to pleasures,

sits alone, and watches this.

The Lord and Master 1s True,

and True is His justice.

He issues His Commands according to His judgment.

The body-fabric will be torn apart into shreds,

and then India will remember these words.

Coming in seventy-eight (1521 C.E), they will depart in Ninety sear,
(1540 C_E.),
And then another disciple of man will rise up.

Nanak speaks the Word of Truth;

He proclaims the Truth at this, the right time. 25

The Janamsakhis also record a meeting between Nanak and Babur and
that too at Saidpur. It is recorded that Nanak was there to meet his friend
Lalo when Mughal forces took over the city and Nanak, along with the
other citizens of the city was incarcerated. In jail, he was given the task
of working on a stone grinder. However, using his miraculous powers,
Nanak caused the grinder to move by itself. When the prison guards
saw what was happening, they immediately informed Babur who sent
for the holy man.

‘Bless me, O man of God, so that I succeed in my endeavour of
conquering India,’ Babur is believed to have asked Guru Nanak. ‘You
have come to conquer my land and you have the audacity to ask for my
blessings,’ Nanak is believed to have replied.

It comes across as rather odd that if this incident actually took place,
Babur failed to mention it in his diary, Baburnama, which otherwise
records meticulously every detail of his encounters. It also comes a5 4
surprise to me that Babur allowed a man who challenged his sovereign
in court to leave without harm. That was not the way of kings ther:
However, in the Sikh tradition, this interaction between Nanak an

“Guru Nanak, English translation by Dr Sant Singh Khalsa MD, Guru Granth
Sahib, www.srigranth.org, pages 722-723 http://www .srigranth.org/servle
gurbani.gurbani?Action=Page&Param=722&english=t&cid=3 1 080#131080


AW wai khbooke lub con

PH Joti MiB y Ki th®
97
jhaliiat hook ona lietorie pie ATA am LE ie HWiterpreted
4 od : vf
af the levis liintary of hhowtiliny hetween the

later Sukh Cranium

aw the hopesnnviniy
Miigehal Einperore and the

ag

‘The cone like spires of anelent Hindy temples rose
the houses, There were several of them, looking be
to the monolithic Muslin architecture th

proudly aridet
autiful, in contrast

| at now dominates the city
of Eminabad, From atar we could tell thar we were entering a city of

anmense historical inportance, Llowever, the dusty roads and worn down
houses highlighted the fact that the city had lost ite economi prowess,

Once, tt was an important trading centre on the Grand Trunk Road
that connected with Lahore and then Delhi, further east, Now, it was

only a shadow of its former glory. The highway had shifted southwards
and a new city, not far from there--Crujranwala

as an important trading centre,

Despite being abandoned in 1947, the temple still looked sturdy. The
paint had worn off and a corrosive layer had developed over the structure
but other than that there was no major harm done. These temples, like
so many other non-Muslim shrines, had been taken over by migrants
from the other side of the border following the creation of Pakistan. As
| drove past these temples, descendants of those refugees stared back at
me. | wondered if in 1992, after the destruction of the Babri mosque
in India, these temples had also been attacked like other temples in the
country. | searched for signs of attack but found none. .

We stopped at a market and asked a group of old men where Bhai
Lalo di Khoi was. They guided us into an alley. Parking the car, we headed
towards it,’ There was a lock at the entrance of the gurdwara. This was the
site of the house of Bhai Lalo, Far from being a worn down place that
Nanak had visited, it was now in good shape. This is one of the most
popular Sikh shrines in Pakistan and is visited by hundreds of devotees
of Nanak. We stood there taking photographs of the locked gurdwara
as people passed us by, wondering if we too were Sikh pilgrims. 44

When Babur took over the city of Saidpur, he renamed it Eminabad.

has replaced Eminabad


siknbookclue. som
WALKING WITH NANAK
98
abur’s life was saved by a woman known -

1 “Min,
shortly before he reached Saidpur. He had gone hungry for

days and this woman had offered him roasted grain to eat, The city We
renamed Eminabad in herhonour,

“This is how the gurdwara is at all times, said Iqbal Quiser ‘Loc

The keys were probably with members of the Sikh comm
residing in the nearby Gurdwara Rori Sahib. | |

Iqbal Qaiser writes in his book Historical Sikh Shrines of Paiste
that there was a Muslim migrant family living inside the Gurdwar
Bhai Lalo di Khoi. In 1989, a Sikh by the name of Sardar Surjt Sing
Panesar bought the property of the shrine with money collected by the
expat Sikh community and renovated the shrine. It was then opene
for worship and now at the time of pilgrimage several Sikhs come t;
this shrine to pay tribute to the memory of Guru Nanak and Bhai Lalo,

Leading the way, Iqbal Qaiser walked around the narrow alleys of
the city. I marvelled at how much of the historical architecture had stil]
been preserved. Then without warning, he stopped in front of a smal
house. It was an ordinary structure with a small door and a few steps
leading to it. From behind its walls a pole covered with a saffron cloth
rose, hoisted on top of which was a Khalsa flag. “This is Gurdwara Chakki
Sahib,’ said Iqbal Qaiser. This too was locked. “This place was used as a
prison at the time of Babur. Guru Nanak was imprisoned here and was
forced to work on a stone grinder.’

‘Iqbal Sahib, do you think it is possible that Nanak never met Babur?

‘Yes. Very much so. I think Nanak must have been an ordinary
person. I don’t mean that in terms of his poetic genius. That remains,
but all these stories about him meeting a Muslim saint, giving hima
lecture, interacting with Malik Bhago, with Babur, etc. seem like later
constructions by his devotees. For them this was a way of paying respect
to their saint.’

It is recorded that B

ked

Unity

WW

The gatekeeper knew Iqbal Qaiser and let us in. There were empty
grounds on both sides of the path, on one side of which a few police


THE JOURNEY BEGINS 99
officials lazed on a charpoy. The doorway to the shrine was a splendid
construction. A verse from the Guru Granth Sahib was carved on top
of it with an artistic effect of bricks. There were also several other artistic
touches given to the construction by the use of bricks, giving the building
, surreal effect. ‘Do you know who designed the building? asked Iqbal
Qaiser, as he photographed the various intricacies of the structure.

Without waiting for me to reply, he said, ‘Bhai Ram Singh. Bhai
Ram Singh was also the Principal of Mayo School of Arts in Lahore. He
js the one who designed the Indian gallery in Buckingham Palace. Do
you know that he too is from a family of carpenters? If you observe the
architecture of the shrine, you will notice that he has created the effect
of woodcutting from the use of bricks. This could also be an interesting
comparison for your story, he told me.

‘How so?”

‘Bhai Ram Singh is of the carpenter caste and Bhai Lalo was also a
carpenter. You could make a connection between the two and this region.’

‘Was Bhai Ram Singh a descendant of Bhai Lalo?’

‘No, that’s not what I meant. They shared the same caste. That's all.
But since they shared the same caste if you go high up in their family
trees I am sure you will be able to make a familial connection between
the two of them.’

‘So if this structure was built by Bhai Ram Singh, who has also
remained the Principal of Mayo School of Art, then this cannot be a
very old building?’ I asked.

‘It was constructed around 1922-23. Before that, it was a small shrine.
Only this gateway was constructed by Bhai Ram Singh.’

Next to the gateway was a small courtyard around which there were
several rooms. A few Pathan Sikh children were playing in the courtyard.
‘Who are they?” I asked Iqbal Qaiser.

‘They are the caretakers of this Sikh gurdwara. They have moved
here from Nankana Sahib.’

We took our shoes off at the portal and walked towards the main
shrine. It was an ordinary room which too was locked. We didn't bother
asking for keys to see the room from inside.

‘So this is where Nanak was made to toil on a grindstone?’ I asked.

i


.... sikbboeke!uh.com

100 WALKING WITH NANAK
‘No, this is the place where he was picked up by the guards of
; ; , 0
This was a small mound outside Eminabad where there Wer Baby,
: © Seve
4
|

pebbles, hence the name Rori Sahib. Nanak was sitting here With p |
hy

Mardana at the time of his arrest.’
As we drove away from the gurdwara, I pointed towards

a TUines

d

structure standing in the middle of the ground next to the Gurd
Roti Sahib and asked Iqbal Qaiser, ‘What is that?"There were h...
buffaloes wallowing around the structure in pools created by main a
“That was also a part of the gurdwara. It must have been the ‘Ne
hall. There was no protective wall around the gurdwara. It was on] nal
a few years ago.’ a
‘What was the condition of the shrine when you first came here”
‘Oh it was horrible. The structure was standing as it is but there,
no protection. A bazaar for the sale of buffaloes used to be set up weld
the premises of the gurdwara. It was after my book was published th
this gurdwara came into the limelight. Now it is fully restored Ther
are security officials here at all times and Sikh pilgrims are sree!

here every year.’


www.sikhbookclub.com

SOUTHWARDS

Nanak and Mardana walked into the caravanserai, unaware of the danger
lurking behind its walls. Little did they know that buried beneath the
ground they were walking on, were hundreds of bodies, of travellers like
them. Wary of travelling in the night on this lonesome road, travellers
thought that they would be protected in the caravanserai. However,
what they did not know was that this establishment was run by two
thugs named Sajjan and Gajjan, who lured travellers in by warning them
about the dangers in the wilderness and then murdered them to steal
their possessions.

Perhaps the best disguise these two thugs had was the vantage point
of their location. Their caravanserai was located on a popular route that
connected important cities, including Lahore, Satgaraha, Deepalpur,
Harrapa, Multan and Uch Sharif. There were hundreds of caravanserais
located here, many of which were privately owned.

While choosing to stay in one of the caravanserais, travellers were
aware of the fact that there would always be the chance of being robbed
of their possessions, but this was more an issue for those establishments
on abandoned routes, not in the prominent ones. To add to the disguise,
both Sajjan and Gajjan, who happened to be uncle and nephew, were
charming hosts and generous in their dealings. They offered lower ‘eit
cAniE other caravanserais and also offered free food. They would sea

ours chit-chatting with the travellers, while other owners treate


ee CON TENTH

21. Camry Amar Dax
a
AN Bad and the Beginning

The Gurws of Sikbiom
Aohnowledgement:



Ww wd iy, bbe wvookclub.com

102 WALKING WITH NANAK

their guests indifferently. For several years now Sajjan and Gajian ha
been running this establishment, killing and robbing their guests

On several occasions search parties had been sent by relatives yp

people who had become victims at the hands of the thugs but no clues
were ever found. This was a long route, surrounded by forests, infested
with wild animals and thugs. There was simply no way to ascertain the
truth. No one ever doubted Sajjan and Gajjan anyway. Thugs were not
likely to run caravanserais. They were thought to be living as bandits in
the jungle.

Usually, Nanak would never opt to stay in a caravanserai. He had
not embarked on this spiritual pilgrimage to stay in the comforts of g
caravanserai. This journey of his was to search for Truth. He wanted to
see the world in all its splendour—all its trees, animals, insects, roads,
people, rituals and religions. During his stays at Talwindi and Sultanpur,
he had realised that for generations his family had been Hindus because
they were born into Hindu households. Similarly, a Muslim becomes
a Muslim not because of any inherent truth that he discovers but only
because he is born into a Muslim household. How then can a Hindu or
a Muslim say that Hinduism or Islam is the only Truth? There has to
be something more out there was his feeling. He wanted to see if there
was any Absolute Truth he could locate in the world.

Nanak knew that in order to discover the world one has to spend
one’s time in the open, which is why he preferred sleeping under the
shade of huge trees as opposed to caravanserais. He knew that in such
facilities he would end up encountering the problems and discussions
that he had left behind in Talwindi and Sultanpur. That was also the
reason he never looked for hospitality in cities or villages. He knew that
just because of their garb, people would regard them as holy men and
shower all sorts of gifts on them. This would weaken their resolve t?
find the Truth.

Mardana, on the other hand, was not as determined as Nanak. He
was willing to trade life on the road for the occasional comfort of a night
at a Caravanserai or in the house of some villager. It was not that trave
eee him; he had spent his entire childhood in transit. Belonging ©

irasi background, who were the keepers of tradition, Mardana, along

Fi


Ww

ww.sikhbookclub.com

SOUTHWARDS 103

with his clan, often travelled from one city to another, singing songs
of the bravery of the local chieftains to their descendants. The current
jandlords would shower companies of Mirasis with gifts for memorising
and spreading the stories of the deeds of their forefathers. Mardana also
knew by heart several folk stories of Hindu deities and Muslim saints
that he would sing during different festivals of Punjab.

Unlike Nanak, Mardana was not on a quest for the Truth. He was
-ontent with his life. However, when he first met Nanak at Talwindi,
when both of them were young boys, he was moved by Nanak’s simplicity.
Nanak was inquisitive, as well as a good listener. He would ask questions
about the various local chieftains, about whom Mardana used to sing
and also about Hindu deities and Muslim saints. He would then ask
questions about Mardana’s travels, about the different villages and cities,
the different tribes and castes, the various temples and shrines and diverse
religious practices.

While interacting with Nanak, Mardana realised that Nanak was
completely unaware of his caste and prestige in society. He spoke with
Mardana as if he were an equal and not a lowly Mirasi. He would express
his fascination for the knowledge that Mardana had, a knowledge that
Mardana did not think was very valuable. Mardana, like others of the
society of his time, had grown up believing that knowledge was what
Hindu Brahmins possessed in Sanskrit or Muslim Maulvis in Arabic.
Nanak made him realise that the knowledge that Mardana had was as
valuable as any other and that it didnt matter if this knowledge was
available in Punjabi.

Through his innocent questions and simple observations that
captured the hypocrisy of society, Nanak had lit a lamp within Mardana’s
soul and without even being aware of it, Mardana had become Nanak’s
devotee. Mardana was a proud Mirasi but whenever he was in the
company of high-caste people he would adopt a subservient manner. That
was the way of life he had been taught. He had also welcomed Nanak
into his house with that assumption, but Nanak challenged the concept
and taught him to value himself no matter what.

"You are a proud race,’ Nanak would say to him. ‘All these landlords
who regard you as a lowly Mirasi would be nothing if you refused to

Tecord their deeds.’


vw A Shinbookclub.com
 coaeieeaaeeemmmnemene ee ena
ee

104 WALKING WITH NANAK

Nanak was highly impressed by the musical skills of his frieng H |
of music B

would sit for hours with him at Talwindi learning the basics

Mardana, music was a way of worship. However, lurking at the back
his mind was the idea that music was un-Islamic, a criticism that cg of
from the more puritanical sects of Islam. These were a minority by; i
had a powerful voice. For this reason, Mardana, while taking pride .
his skill, was also apologetic about his talent. Nanak assured him thi
his talent was worth more than the skill of a Mullah in leading Prayers

Once Nanak went to Sultanpur for work, Mardana followed him,
abandoning his previous lifestyle. Mardana knew that he could not liye
without the friend who had shown him a new way of living. Hence when
Nanak expressed his desire to leave on a long journey, Mardana knew
that he had no other option but to follow him. He had become aware
of Nanak’s importance in his life.

What Mardana had not realised while preparing to leave with Nanak
was that travelling with his mentor would be so tough. Many days went by
without food and many nights without shelter. They had been swept away
in the rain, roasted in the sun, attacked by mosquitoes and threatened
by wild animals. Whereas such incidents had only strengthened Nanak’
resolve, Mardana, on many occasions, regretted his decision to accompany
him. And then when the untoward situation passed and they pressed
forward once again, he would forget all about his lapses in commitment.

While walking on the road, the dust rising from their feet, Mardana
saw a small light on top of a structure and asked Nanak if they could
stay there. They had been walking continuously ever since their departure
from Saidpur for an entire month, only resting at night to sleep. This
was only the beginning of their journey which was why it was also the
toughest part. Their bodies were still not used to the demands of the
road. For years, their bodies had been spoilt by the luxuries of householés
of sisters and mothers and then wives looking after all their needs; by
now for the first time, they were on their own. Calluses appeared un :
their feet and they had suffered many scratches after rubbing g4!"°
thorny bushes.

They were heading towards the historic city of Multan. Nanak wanted

to visit this holy city in the southern region of Punjab before heading


!

ASK CK lub.com |
vad
SOUTHWARDS 105
east towards Bengal. At that time Multan was one of the biggest cities
of Punjab and was known for the religious shrines of Muslim saints, and
Jain and Hindu temples. It was a sacred space for people of all religious
denominations. The temple of Prahlad Bhagat was one of the most
important Hindu temples there, while the shrine of Bahauddin Zakariya
was one of the most popular Muslim shrines located beside the temple.

Nanak was particularly fascinated by this city, because to him it

signified the religious syncretism that he yearned for. Mecca was a
sacred city only for Muslims, while Benaras was sacred to the Hindus;
Multan was revered by all. He thought that perhaps the answers he was
looking for would be found there. Later, when he visited Multan, he was
disappointed to see that the religious syncretism he had imagined was
non-existent. The Hindus were assured of their superiority, while the
Muslims were assured of theirs.

After a month of walking, Nanak too was exhausted and would have
appreciated the luxuries afforded at the caravanserai but when Mardana
recommended that they go and stay there, he as expected, refused. ‘Let’s
sleep under this tree instead,’ he said, pointing towards an ancient banyan
tree. They were near the village of Makhdoom Pur Pahuran and the
caravanserai was in front of them. The nearest city of Tulamba, about
midway between Lahore and Multan, was still a little further away.

‘If you refuse to listen to me then I will refuse to accompany you any
further,’ said Mardana. Even though Mardana regarded Nanak as his
mentor and Guru, there was a cordial relationship between them which
was not constrained by formalities. Mardana could sometimes blackmail
his friend into doing things he initially refused to do. Hence, due to
Mardana’s persistence, Nanak and Mardana entered the caravanserai of
Sajan and Gaijan.

Sajjan and Gajjan were disappointed to see their latest guests. They
were used to entertaining rich merchants and royal dignitaries, who
carried along with them a lot of wealth. Jogis and religious mendicants
usually stayed away from such establishments and they liked it that way.

However, they did not allow their disappointment to reflect on their
expressions. They welcomed Nanak and Mardana and after serving them
4 warm meal, showed them to their room. There were several other


ons WALKING WITH MAMAK
gnests staying at the caravanser ai and a lot of money was Waiting t,
; : ; _ ; Py Thy Fy
ted, Honest hospitality in this case would do them no hay Th ‘
dso thought that this act of kindness towa rds the holy men World p4

them: of some of their ans.

At night when everyone had retired to their roorns, the two th.
desenssed their latest guests. ‘Should we let them live or kill them? agi,
Sagan, the aricle. ‘

‘What good would come out of killing these two fakirs? I doubt the,
have anvthing we could ase. Besides, I dorit think they will stay here
2 long time. They will leave in a day or two, replied Gajjan.

‘Gaijan, you are still a young man, which is why you are impressionable
You do not know yet the ways of these holy men. Afraid of being looted
on the way, a lot of rich merchants now disguise thernselves as fakir:
aad mendicants, «0 they can fool people like us. I'm sure they are rich
nuerchants from Lahore. They are dressed up in this rnanner just to save

the cost of hiring guards.’
‘Bat if they are merchants, where is their baggage? They came

t aca sure they have hidden it in the jungle outside, next to the
LEBVETEEO

 doxit knew, Uncle. Lan sure you are judging them wrong, They look
hike innocent people to me.I am willing to concede to your argument
oll aloo hele you kill them, but I am afraid of the wrath of holy men.
Don’t you kro that they know powerful spells? What if they are truly
sens of Goods God would never forgive us for their murder.”

Stop being stupid, Gajjan. Don't you know this is the Kaliyue*
There are no holy men left in the world. All of them are deceivers. They
nave trade a business out of religion.’

Plated by Nanaks acceptance of his request, Mardana was 0°
agains ot a iolhy srend, He tried striking up a conversation with Nasak
but Nanak was unresponsive. Mardana thought that it was perhaps due
te bis imemmtence om staying at this caravanserai against Nanak’s will. He
started. to regges hia decision brut it was too late. He picked up his
frome ome commen of the room and asked Nanak to sing along. Nanak 0%
anmndys tagpy ween he sang. This is what he sang:


Wane DG
“W.sikhbookclub.com,
SOUTHWARDS 107

Bronze is bright and shiny, but when it is rubbed, its blackness appears,
Washing ¥, its impurity 1s not removed, even if it is washed a hundred times.
They alone are my friends, who travel along with me;

And in that place, where the accounts are called for, they appear standing

‘ 26
with me.

Nanak stopped singing after a little while but Mardana continued playing
the rubab. Nanak did not look tired anymore. It was as if his words had
taken away all his tiredness. Mardana had no doubt that these words
were directed against him. He felt ashamed of his blackmailing. Silent
tears rolled down his cheeks as he played his instrument, trying to hide
his emotions in the sound of the music.

Sajjan and Gajjan had now approached Nanak and Mardana’s room.
Ithad been decided that they would torture these men, ask them where
they had hidden their goods and then kill them. Outside the room they
heard the sound of this song being sung.

Nanak continued after a little while:

There are houses, mansions and tall buildings, painted on all sides;
But they are empty within, and they crumble like useless ruins.
The herons in their white feathers dwell in the sacred shrines of pilgrimage.
They tear apart and eat the living beings, and so they are not called white.
My body is like the simmal tree; seeing me, other people are fooled.
Its fruits are useless—just like the qualities of my body.
The blind man is carrying such a heavy load, and his journey through the
mountains is so long.
My eyes can see, but I cannot find the way. How can I climb up and cross
over the mountain?
What good does it do to serve, and be good, and be clever?
O Nanak, contemplate the Naam, the Name of the Lord, and you shall
be released from bondage.*’

wun Nanak, English érxinslation by Dr Sant Singh Khalsa MD, Guru Granth
*hib, www.srigranth.org, page 729 http:/ /www.stigranth.org/serviet/gurbani.
Surbani?Action= Page&Param=729&Xenglish=t&cid=31320#13 1320

“Thid,


Hw nb NbOoKCUb.com |
PReapreatiten one cston < mene

WALKING WITH NANAK

LO8

Hearing Nanak’s words, Sajjan felt a surge through his body. fH. fe
as “f Nanak was singing these words for him, as if he knew about tl /
plan. ‘The herons in their white feathers dwell in the sacred shrine,
pilgrimage. They tear apart and eat the living beings, and so they tn
not called white.... My body is like the simmal tree; seeing me, othe
people are fooled.’ .

He realised that Gajjan was right. These men were indeed mep of
God and it was through divine knowledge that Nanak had COME to knoy
of their intentions. Despite possessing these insights, why did Nanak
display so much humility, Sajjan wondered to himself

Gajjan was unaware of the storm brewing in his uncle’s mind. The
music fell on his ears but he wasn't listening. He had forced his mind to
remove any doubts about the veracity of these holy men and was now
convincing himself that they were indeed deceivers and hence it was
alright if they were killed.

When Sajjan opened the door of Nanak’s room and stepped
inside, Gajjan was preparing to attack Mardana. However, before he
could do that, Sajjan bent down at Nanak’s feet and started to cry,
Gajjan was as shocked as Nanak and Mardana. Nanak put his hand on
top of Sajjan’s head and allowed him to cry his heart out. The music had
stopped playing.

When Sajjan was done crying he told Nanak about their plan.
He also told him about all the murders that they had committed by
luring travellers with their hospitality. Nanak listened patiently, shocked
at the confession of the thugs, but he did not express any displeasure
with his facial expressions. When Sajjan was done confessing, Nanak told
him that since he had now realised the true path he should no long!
worry. He suggested that they should convert their house into a Hous¢
of God where people from all creeds, religions and sects would be
welcome and provided with food and shelter. The next day, Nanak and
Mardana left their new followers, and headed towards Multan; while
Sajjan and Gajjan converted their caravanserai into a House of 6°

as Nanak had suggested. This was to become the first Gurdwara of the
Sikh religion,


HHTHMA RK

a

je wee th weve dey ot Fad 1 weske up at five, er heating: ter only thee
w oun wth 2 rrible flu and « bad headache | Combe trepiladedd catheng wp

i Queer and powtponing the trip. | knew that he would be muse
oun dekaghted to cancel He had returned to Lahowe a dhiny tedewe Bia
ae baring completed an intensive tour of interior Sindh sind Kanwchi
Hr had boon gone foe a month He would have fled te apend the theme
dur of Eid with hie family while recowering from hie exertions. He
grace? wat arul his health is not what it weed wer bee,

Despite hix physical tiredness, Iqbal Qgiser readily agreed to
anompany me to Tulambas. This would have been enw first visit 0 the
devine of Guru Nanak there, but Iqbal Qgiser had explored the chrine
aad is waaanity sbout a decade ago while researching hae beck,

Often, lqbal Qaiver’s commitment towards me and my rewearch ix
bambling, Not only is Iqbal Qgiver always willing to travel with ene, be
ie tho more than willing to share all hie research with me. even df it in
unpublished. This is very different from the erudite wholars of farmone
niwersitios. | have learned through personal experience that acholars

4 eres eee ee gre 8 enodens Gieoaghh « dillicad posted.
lqbal Qpiser ix different from any such whole With only «
Brenner tactcicirertarriodrthenrteonts
proaches enna meetin eit



ve eb PYOGKE Les COMM

WALKING WITH NANAK

110

in Punjabi, When | explained to hin that cenit being bere, ity
Punjabi household | could not speak my mother tongue if tok Ut,
task of teaching me Punjabi and now I have a working understand,
> language.

7 _ rine system that is prevalent in Pakistani Punjab, Pup,
is looked down upon, It is considered to be a language of the boorish; and
the uneducated. As a child, my elite private school had a strict policy thy,
any student found speaking in Punjabi, even in the playground, Would by
fined, Only English was to be spoken or at worst, Urdu, Con Ling, of Aig ip
such an environment, the educated elite of Punjab ends up disowniny, it
fact, ridiculing anything Punjabi, which includes the poetry of Babs Farid
Guru Nanak, Shah Hussain, Waris Shah and Bulleh Shah, Whereas thy
educated elite can quote verses from Shakespeare and ‘I. §, Eliot, they
are completely unaware of their local poets.

One of the reasons I was blown away by Iqbal Qaiser and becarne
his student was that he introduced me to my own culture, While
travelling with him I learned to uncover the beauty of localities through
their history and heritage, localities I had otherwise dismissed as being
congested and polluted. I learnt for the first time that I could even learn
from a person who had never been to school and could only speak in
Punjabi. Once while sitting at home, my ‘uneducated’ guard was able to
recite to me the complete Saif-u/-Maluk of Mian Muhammad Baksh
whereas my ‘educated’ friends didn't even know who Mian Muhammad
Baksh was. The English equivalent of reciting the entire Saif-ul-Maluk
would be recalling an entire act of Shakespeare’s Hamlet.

Ignoring the warnings of my body I lifted myself off the bed and
Prepared to head south to Tulamba. It was a journey of about three hours.
Just a little ahead of the city of Tulamba we took a worn out road to head
towards the village of Makhdoom Pur Pahuran where the Gurdwara of
Nanak was situated.
on enue goal and thee was a git os
banner describj h e its “ holiday. ci top of the wor ade
the education ae in public 7 es Punjab eee ee pins
to see if there was sn contaet hie reg stuickly through the wi ;

information given for the caretaker °


www.sikhbookclu b.com|

SOUTHWARDS 111

the school. Next to the wall of the school was a huge playground where
children from the village were playing cricket. None of them knew where
we could find the guard.

There was a single lane road with several potholes running next to
ie school. ‘This was the old Multan road,’ Iqbal Qaiser told me. The
new road, now a splendid highway, is about twenty kilometres from here.

‘There is another serai here which is said to have been built by Sher
Shah Suri. Do you know that when Humayun was chased out of India
by Sher Shah, his retinue passed through this road? You can find the
reference for that in Humayunnama.’

Having travelled more than three hundred kilometres there was
no way 1 was going back without seeing the gurdwara from the inside.
[entertained the thought of scaling the wall and jumping down, for a
little while, but decided against it after looking at the height of the walls.

Iqbal Qaiser walked over to a man working in the fields next to the
school. He came back with the address of the guard of the school. We
drove over to his house to find that he was not home but his son was.
His son walked us to the house where his father was working as a mason.
Iqbal Qaiser introduced himself to the guard, whose name was Awais, and
told him about his prior visit to the shrine. There was recognition and the
two of them shared stories from the last visit, which had been in 1994.

Awais opened the door and led us into the school. There were models
of two nuclear rockets in front of us—Ghori and Abdali, symbols of
Pakistani nationalism. Behind them was the gurdwara, now converted
into an office for the Principal. On the external wall of his office there
were badly painted pictures of Jinnah and Allama Iqbal, while around
them were Quranic verses.

It seemed as if the entire purpose of education was to instil love
for one’s religion and nation here. A new boundary wall had been
constructed, covering the gurdwara, on which the ninety-nine names of
Allah were written. On another wall, the names and deeds of ‘Muslim
scientists’ were written as if there were no other scientists worthy of
mention.

Various studies have been carried out on the biased nature of the
Pakistani education system and the religious puritanism that it promotes



indyedaaq '1 1
pequeurury “()|
OATES 6

TePqy uesseH ‘yg
fey seiey 7
iyeiey “9

JIPYS YN "Ss
uenedyed “f
qryes andieyiey “¢
qiyes euryuen ‘7
a40YeT ‘|



nd VV “sikhbookcliy, com.
 ceaeeeneeemene eR

i WALKING WITH NANAK
through its curriculum. The entire school curriculum of Pakistan Spo

which is a compulsory subject till university, has been designed ing mt

way as to instil in the minds of young students the separateness of Hing a

from Muslims and hence, justify the creation of Pakistan, There is .
denying the fact that patriotism plays an important role in the educatis
system of any country; but in Pakistan, nationalism is premised On hatre f
towards Hindus, which makes it dangerous. The Pakistan Project ‘ |
product of the compartmentalisation of religious identity,

Every day in this school, Muslim students are taught that thei;
religion is the best religion in the world and that Islam brought light
into this land of darkness, which was earlier dominated by Hindus, They
are taught that Hindus and Muslims detested each other from the very
beginning, particularly the Hindus; hence the creation of this country was
essential. All traces of the Hindu Past are omitted from the curriculum,
Students from such government schools emerge more radicalised
and susceptible to Islamic militancy than from your neighbourhood
madrassas. I wondered about the contrast between Nanak’s teachings
and the lessons that were taught here. It is here, sitting within Nanak’
memory that these students are taught to hate Nanak, a non-Muslim.

All traces of the gurdwara had been whitewashed within the
Principal’s office. There were Pictures of former Principals and pictures
of sacred Muslim places. There was a portrait of Jinnah behind the
Principal’s desk, which was placed right at the spot where once the Thara
Sahib must have been kept.

"You have done a great job with the renovation of the building,’ said
Iqbal Qaiser to the guard. He was lying. I knew he was not pleased with
the work, but he did Not want to respond with derision to the hospitality


SOUTHWARDS 113

Before leaving, | stopped in front of the wall that recorded the history
of the school. It was noted that the school began as a primary school in
latter half of the nineteenth century. There was no mention of the
ara. It was as if the school had been here in this building since
ption. Like the omission of Hinduism and the names of Hindu
m Pakistani history, the story of this gurdwara had

gurdw
its ince
kings and queens fro

also been erased.
‘The school was somewhere else earlier, Awais told me, as we headed

hack to his home. ‘The school was shifted here during the Ayub era, after
the Department of Augaf was created.’
What happened to all the land that was once attached to this

gurdwara? I asked.
” Ft was snatched by the land mafia. Now we only have a small tract
in front of the building.’

“There used to be a serai here,

‘Yes,’ replied Awais. “But it
converted into a primary school for girls.’

We dropped Awais and drove to the outskirts of the city, observing
the buildings around us carefully to locate the lost serai. Right at the
edge of the city, we came across the school. There were no signs of the

older building. Next to it was an ancient graveyard.

outside of the city,’ asked Iqbal Qaiser.
doesn't exist anymore. It has been


ve, ssienboe ke!'k. OM,
el

GURU TEGH BAHADUR

The decapitated head of the Guru hung at the Chandni Chowk of Delhy
It was the order of Emperor Aurangzeb that no one should touch tt.
body of the Guru. It was on the Emperor’s orders that the Guru had
been beheaded. The Sikhs of Delhi looked in fear at the body of their
temporal and spiritual leader. Then one day a dust storm gripped the
city. Everything turned red and it was impossible to see anything. It wa
as if the curse of God had fallen upon the people of the city. When the
dust storm receded, to everyone’s amazement, the body and head of the
Guru had disappeared.

Taking advantage of the situation, an untouchable Hindu, Jaita, had
recovered the body from the chowk and presented it to Guru Gobind
Singh at Anandpur, who then cremated the body as per prescribed rites.
Jaita was given the title of the true son of the Guru, by the new Guru.

According to Sikh tradition, Guru Tegh Bahadur sacrificed his
life for Kashmiri Pandits who had approached the Guru at Anandpu!
and requested him to intercede on their behalf with the Emperor. The
Emperor had recently implemented the Jaziya tax (per capita yearly
tax historically levied by Islamic states on certain non-Muslim subjec®
“im cece aa under Islamic law) on the non-Muslims
The Bralcving be * _ ne stress on the Pandit panennys bis
help. Sikh tradition eat one of Tegh Bahadur tose d

points out that it was actually the young Gobin



w At Sis dl al
wv W.sikhbookclub
tana deiaeage ‘com.
GURU TEGH BAHADUR 15

singh who had urged his father to come to the aid of the Pandits. ‘None
would be worthier than yourself, father, for such a noble act,’?* Gobind
7 reported to have said.

At Delhi, when the Guru introduced himself as the Guru of the
Sikh community, the Mughal officials mocked him and challenged him
by saying that if he was a Guru then he should perform a miracle. Guru
Tesh Bahadur wrote a magic spell on a piece of paper and attaching
shat to astring tied it around his neck. He then challenged the Mughal
juthorities saying that as long as this spell was tied around his neck, his
head could not be separated from his body. Taking up the challenge, the
Emperor ordered the beheading of the Guru. When the blade of the
executioner cut through his neck, his head separated from his body and

he Guru died. The Emperor ordered one of his officials to show him the
piece of paper around his neck. It read, ‘He gave his head, not his secret.””
The Sikhs believe that the Guru had performed a miracle while dying.

The assassination of Guru Tegh Bahadur was the second martyrdom
in Sikh history. Before him his grandfather Guru Arjan had been
martyred on the orders of the Mughal Emperor Jahangir. Aurangzeb
was the grandson of Jahangir and Jahangir was the great grandson of
Emperor Babur who had incarcerated Guru Nanak. In this long history
of Mughal-Sikh conflict, Guru Tegh Bahadur was the latest victim.

The Sikhs believe that Guru Tegh Bahadur sacrificed his life for the
right cause. He had decided to stand up for the protection of a persecuted
community and was punished for it. Years later, when Guru Gobind
Singh founded the Khalsa, he ordered his followers to keep a kirpan
with them at all times for self-defence and also for the protection of
the persecuted. This became a religious duty after Guru Tegh Bahadur

showed the way. In Sikh history, Aurangzeb is portrayed as a bigoted
Muslim who wanted to implement Shariah (Islamic law) all over the
Indian subcontinent. This simplistic view of history assigns the role of

oy - . ne te ee ee ern
~ Mohinder Pal Kohli, Guru Tegh
vahitya Akademi, 1992), page 1
ep eyasachi Bhattacharya (ed.), Approaches
‘ortograpbhy (New Delhi: Primus Books, 2011),

‘Babadur: Testimony of Conscience (New Delhi:

)
<

to History: Essays in Indian
page 274


a a ld

~

wow mnpookelub.com,
wy

116 WALKING WITH NANAK
oppressor and oppressed to Aurangzeb and Tegh Bahadur TESDectiye)
The reality was a little more complicated. :

Son Tegh Bahadur was appointed as the Guru of the sip
community in the year 1664 after the death of the child Gury Harktish,,
Tegh Bahadur was the son of the warrior Guru Hargobind and had hee
bypassed for the Guruship earlier. His oldest brother, Baba Gurditt,
was to become Guru after Hargobind, but he passed away during th.
Guru's lifetime and so before his death, Hargobind appointed Har Rai.
the younger son of Baba Gurditta to succeed him. Guru Tegh Bahady,
accepted the ascension of Guru Har Rai to the highest seat of Sikh
power and retreated to Bakala in Bari Doab, where he lived for twenty
years. Here he spent his time in seclusion and meditation. .

The years spent in political isolation must have played an important
role in the development of Guru Tegh Bahadur’s personality. It is fo,
this reason that even after he was appointed the Guru by a strange turn
of events, he remained of a deeply spiritual nature. His poetry, which js
included in the Guru Granth Sahib, focuses particularly on the nature of
divinity, the role of the Guru, the triviality of the world, the liberation of
the human soul and detachment from the world.3° A lot of the themes
that Tegh Bahadur discusses in his poetry are those he picked up from
the poetry of Nanak. Like Nanak, he too discouraged extreme ascetic
practices. After a long hiatus in the poetic tradition, he was the first Guru
since Guru Arjan to compose hymns.

While Guru Tegh Bahadur was reflecting on the nature of divinity
and the purpose of the human soul, the politics of the Sikh community
was in turmoil. Guru Har Rai’s ascension was challenged by his eldet
brother, Dhir Mal, causing a split within the Sikh community. Another
challenge came from Harji, the grandson of Prithi Chand, who was
ine older brother of Guru Arjan, who like Dhir Mal had refused
acknowledge the leader ship of the young Guru and continued promoting
his own sect. There was no doubt that the feudalization of the institution
of Gurudom had been completed with various parties vying for the
monetary and political rewards it brought.

Parmer ene ee ee ae
Grewal, Four Centuries of Sikh Tradition, Pages144-146


CURU TEGH BAHADUSZ

7

This was the time when the Mughal princes too were

of succession amongst each other after sidelining the
Someregn ees ee rroremen
para Shikob,* who was eventually defeated and killed by his younger
‘thet, Aurangzeb, the future Emperor. It is to be noted here dest
Guru Har Rai had kept the contingents that were maintained by Guru
Hargobind after the assassination of his father, which he planned to use
in aad of the elder prince.

After Aurangzeb established himself on the throne in Dethi, he
asked Guru Har Rai to present himself and explain his political position
during the civil war. Guru Har Rai sent his elder son, Ram Rai, who sot
only removed all doubts about the loyalty of the Guru from the mind of
the Emperor but also, according to Sikh tradition, reinterpreted some
of Nanak’s poetry to suit the religious inclination of the Empezor™
Disappointed at the conduct of his son, Guru Har Rai bypassed his son
when it was time to appoint the next Guru and bestowed the title of
Guru upon his younger son, Harkrishan, who was six years old at the time.

Ram Rai rebelled against his father’s decision and used his cordial
telationship with the Emperor to get him to intercede on his behalf.
In order to resolve this issue within the Sikh community, Emperor
(saa: apd aa pedestrian



vee a nbooticluh.com,
‘etheermeestinn tran secre wth in et serra

vis WALKING WITH NANAK
>

Ram Singh and Nawab Saif Khan** to strengthen his position, j Se
that the newly appointed Guru was aware of the precarious Condit,
his office was in, due to the connivance of Harji and Dhirmal, and kne,
that he needed to have better relations with the Sikh sangats of differey
regions and also with the local chiets. . t

Joseph Davey Cunningham, the author ot 4 History of the Sikhs, frie
the Origin of the Nation to the Battle of the Sutlej, writes the following
about the political manoeuvrings of Guru Tegh Bahadur:

Tegh Bahadur followed the example of his father with unequal
footsteps, and that, choosing tor his haunts the wastes between
Hansi and the Sutlej, he subsisted himself and his disciples by
plunder, in a way, indeed, that rendered him not unpopular with
the peasantry. He is further credibly represented to have leagued
with a Muhammadan zealot, named Adam Hafiz, and to have
levied contributions upon rich Hindus, while his confederate did
the same upon wealthy Musalmans. They gave ready asylum to
all fugitives, and their power interfered with the prosperity of
the country; the imperial troops marched against them, and they
were at last defeated and made prisoners. The Muhammadan

saint was banished, but Aurangzeb determined that the Sikh
should be put to death.*4

Cunningham points out that this was not the first time that the Guru had
been summoned to Delhi. Right at the beginning of his reign, Aurangzed
had asked Tegh Bahadur to present himself at court as a ‘pretender (0
power and as a disturber of peace’.35 He was saved by the intercession
the Chief of Jaipur who ‘advocated his cause’26 Cunningham also cit e
the ‘machinations of Ram Rai, and his own suspicious proceedings ;
the reason for Guru Tegh Bahadur’s assassination.3”

Gandhi, History of the Sikh Gurus Retold, page 634

Cunningham, 4 History of the Sikhs, page 110

Tbid., page 109

ST bid.

3Thid,



GURU TEGH BAHADUR
119

the Sikhs had found a delicate balance between a leader who
vas not only spiritually inclined but also someone who understood
pe it portance of militarisation in the form of Guru Tegh Bahadur.
Following the footsteps of his father, Hargobind, Tegh Bahadur
continued gathering weapons and maintaining troops. He kept with
himself the sword of Guru Hargobind, which he then gave to his son
before he embarked on his journey to Delhi.

The steps that Guru Tegh Bahadur had taken during his tenure
as the leader of the Sikh community were furthered by his son, Guru
Gobind Singh, who was much more militaristically inclined than his
father; however, the foundations for the formation of the Khalsa had
teen laid during the reign of Guru Tegh Bahadur.



THE INSPIRATION

Kamal’s axe fell on the bark of the £ikar (acacia) tree with precision. He
hit the same spot over and over again. The time he took between each hit
was the same, creating a rhythmic sound. It was a monsoon afternoon,
the weather was humid and his body was sweaty.

While his conscious mind focused on the task at hand, his sub-
conscious mind wandered away into the jungle, listening to the
continuous flow of the river and the sound of its journey reminding one
that life never stops. The birds chirped along with the sound of the ae,
as if keeping time with this eternal music of life. Sheikh Farid’s most
popular gawwali (Muslim devotional song) sprouted from the fountain of
his heart spontancously, as he started to sing loudly. This particular piect
had been sung by a group of gawwal (those who sing qawwali) devotees
who had come with the Diwan of Chawali Mashaikh the previous night

I did not sleep with my love tonight
And every bit of my body aches.

Go ash the deserted ones,

How they pass their nights.

Comforted by the solitude of the forest, Kamal sang his heart pete

birds, the wind, the trees and the river sang along with him.

Baba Farid, Baba Sheikh Farid, searchgurbani.com, heeps://searcheu”

com/bhagats/haba farid

a


ww sikhbook |
www Snbookclub.com,

THE INSPIRATION
12]

singing, he happened to hear the voice of another man singing fr

; mn 1 TT . yt re - om
another part of the jungle. The voice was husky but was hitting all th

wi aste ‘ont ‘ ‘ 1
high notes with masterly control, Leaving behind his axe and a small

_ ¥ » ° = i. a ft ¢ ~ “ fie : a sma.
rile of logs, he followed the voice to the point of its origin ‘

] plaited my tresses,

With vermillion daubed the parting of my hair
And went to Him

But with me He would not lie.

My heart is grief-stricken, I could die.

] wept, and the world wept with me.

Even birds of the forest cried,

Only my soul torn out of my body shed not a tear,
Nay, my soul which separated me from my Beloved
Shed not a tear.

In a dream He came to me

(I woke) and He was gone.

I wept a flood of tears.*?

Kamal discovered the mysterious singer singing seated on a mound
deep within the forest. He had heard tales about this part of the jungle.
It was believed that this was the place where the spirits and djinns of
the forest resided and so it was avoided by people. Sitting on top of the
mound singing at the top of his lungs he saw a man who must have
been in his late thirties or early forties, wearing a saffron chola. By the
look of his clothes he could not tell if the singer was Hindu or Muslim.
Next to him was his companion, playing the rubab. He was dressed in
similar fashion. Kamal’s initial reaction was that they were djinns. He
wanted to run away but he could not bring himself to break off from
the spell of the music. Even if they were djinns or spirits Kamal had no
doubt that they were benign; in fact, they were probably holy. He sat hi
little distance away from the singer, far enough not to intrude into their
Space, but not so far as to remain invisible to them.

——
"Sin

gh, trans. Hymns of the Gurus, pages 116-117


#



WALKING WITH NANAK
122

Beloved I cannot come to Thee,

No messenger will take my message,

Blessed sleep come thou back to me, |

That in my dreams My Lover J again may see!
Nanak, what wilt thou give the messenger

Who brings thee a message from Thy Master?

Tl sever my head to make a seat for him;

Headless though I be, I'll continue to serve him.

Why then do I not die? Why not give away my life?
My Husband is estranged from me and has taken another wife

As he listened to the words and allowed them to sink in, he felt as if these
words had also been composed by Sheikh Farid. It felt to him as if this
poem was a continuation of what he had been singing earlier. Maybe this
was Sheikh Farid himself, appearing as a benign spirit and completing
his poem, he thought. He had never seen a picture of Sheikh Farid and
hence did not know what he looked like.

Repeating the last two lines, Nanak ended the song and opened his
eyes to face Kamal. It was as if he knew that he was sitting there even
though his eyes had been shut throughout the song. ‘Did you like the
song?’ he asked him.

‘I did,’ said Kamal. ‘But I am a little confused about its meaning.’

‘You can ask me,’ said Nanak, assuring Kamal.

‘We are told as Muslims that our Lord loves us more than the!
of seventy mothers. Why then does God sometimes become so cruel?

‘That is the duality,’ said Nanak with a smile, rather impressed a
the wisdom of the young man sitting in front of him. ‘Everything i0 lite
works in contradiction. Evil emerges from goodness, light emetg® from
darkness and that is the nature of God as well. Whereas He is out belove
on the one hand, He is also our tormentor. Whereas He provides ts with
pees it is also Him where solace comes from. I hope that is clear’

na nodded as he continued reflecting on Nanak’s interpretano™

me, young man, what are you doing in the jungle?’ asked Nan’

ove

“ibid


THE INSPIRATION
123

‘My name is Sheikh Kamal. I am the official scribe of Harzat Sheikh
phrahim. He is the twelfth descendant of the great Sheikh Farid-ud-din
of Pakpattan. That is what I do in my official capacity but I also have a

assion for music and poetry, which is why I came towards your song
fike a honey bee floats towards nectar. I compose poems of my own but
they are not any good as yet.’

“Sheikh Ibrahim?’ Nanak pondered the name. ‘T haven't heard of hirn
but I have come across Sheikh Farid-ud-din’s name while I was living in
Sultanpur and also while I was in Lahore. I have been told that he was
a great Sheikh and was a poet as well.’

‘Yes,’ Kamal smiled with pride. “Do you want to hear his verses?’

‘Yes, of course.’

On hearing this, Kamal repeated the verses he had been singing
earlier. Mardana, who was listening to the conversation between these
two couldn't help but notice that there was a lot of similarity between
the symbolism of Nanak and Sheikh Farid. Nanak listened with his eyes
closed, admiring the beauty of every single word pronounced.

‘Subhan Allah! Subhan Allah! What a beautiful poem,’ said Nanak,
when Kamal was finished. ‘There is such intense pain in Sheikh Farid’s
words, He must be a true Sheikh“! indeed. Can you tell me more about

him and his poetry?”

ass

After finishing his morning prayers, which began at sunrise and continued
till noon, Sheikh Ibrahim left his meditation room and headed towards
the courtyard of the shrine. From here, he could see the entire breadth
of the land spread out in front of him. This was the city of Pakpattan in
the middle of which the River Sutlej snaked through. This city had once
been known as Ajodhan, but its name was changed to Pakpattan after the
head of the Chistiyan si/si/a (religious order), Baba Farid, left Delhi and
settled here. It was a small insignificant city at that time next to which
N top of an abandoned mound Baba Farid used to teach his students.

sey eer ~
Sheikh’ is an Arabic word used for an honourable man



ea Hookelit. COM)
> Fxnbookeltt CO

WALKING WITH NANAK

124
has his followers grew the city slowly deve,
ag Log
‘ato a major trading Clty, with the shrine at the centre of the activin
As the followers of the saint grew SO did the power of his desceniye
who became major feudal lords and political players of the region :
€ the courtyard and next to it was a beays i

|

shrine was in one corner 0
es of the descendants of the saint

tomb, which contained the grav , )
| city and this shrine was the city centre. The,
‘

Ajodhan was a smal
dit. The city was a minor trading centre Wher

were several stalls aroun 3
Baba Farid moved here but over the years, as the importance of his shrin.

‘ncreased, so did the size of the city.
Sheikh Ibrahim was the twelfth successor of Baba Farid. Every day

after his morning prayers he would spend several hours in an isolated
room pondering on the poetry of his famous ancestor. He knew each
verse by heart. It had been three hundred years since the death of the
great Sufi but his poetry was still sung by qawwals at the shrine and by
fakirs in the cities of Punjab.
There were several themes in Baba Farid’s poetry that eluded Ibrahim,
The tragedy was that there was no one he could approach to expound on
these philosophies. Being the spiritual descendant of the great Sheikh it
was believed by his devotees that he had inherited the spirituality of Farid
and hence there was no one who could understand the enigmatic nature
of Baba Farid’s poetry better than his spiritual descendant. However,
Sheikh Ibrahim was well aware of the fact that while perhaps he was the
best person to expound upon Baba Farid’s poetry and philosophy, there
were several aspects of his teachings that even he did not understand.
As the head of this big religious institution, he could not admit to
this fact. There were certain expectations from him as a descendant of the
family and as much as he abhorred the institutionalisation of spirituality
as was being practised in the name of his family, he could not find a way
to escape it.
7 ite nets around the courtyard and found himself in front of
mien ela isEHy hema abun barn ties pace
at Tibba Hai Deen 4 ead of a spiritual lineage whose shrine was preset
Tbrakinn ne nh an ancestral village of Baba Farid and hence She!
a Chistiyan shrine and was spiritually connect®

However after his deat

ak


Www. ye

THE INSPIRATION
125

a,

se shrine of Sheikh Farid at Pakpattan, one of the biggest centres of

of

she Sufi Chistivan school of thought in all of South Asia.

the The Diwan was an educated man and could talk about religious
anatteS fuently but through conversations with him, Sheikh Ibrahim
ba 4 gauged that he was not a person who could delve deep into the
ahilosophies of Sheikh Farid. His learning was rote learning and not
velective learning. The two Sufis sat facing each other and engaged in
, pivial religious discussion when Kamal came rushing in. His meeting
with Nanak and Mardana had excited him and he wanted to share it
th his spiritual masters.

‘Are they Muslim?’ Sheikh Ibrahim enquired.

‘No, Master,’ said Kamal. “He says that he is neither a Muslim nor
; Hindu. In fact, he says that there is no Hindu, no Muslim, but there
is a Mirasi bard accompanying him. He plays the rubab while Nanak
sings his poems. I heard one poem that he was singing. It was one of
the most beautiful poems | have ever heard.’ Kamal did not realise that
while saying this he had offended Sheikh Ibrahim who took immense
pride in the fact that his ancestor Baba Farid was the best Punjabi poet
ever. Without waiting for Sheikh Ibrahim’s request, Kamal recited the
poem he had heard Nanak singing.

Mocking the enthusiasm of Kamal, the Diwan turned towards
Sheikh Ibrahim and said, ‘How could a person reach the pinnacle of
the spiritual ladder without converting to Islam?’ The words of Nanak
clearly had had no impact upon him.

The Diwan continued looking at the Sheikh for confirmation but
there was none. The Sheikh was still wondering about the poetry of
Nanak. It sounded as enigmatic to him as that of Baba Farid. Maybe
this Nanak would be able to solve the puzzle of Baba Farid’s poetry for
him, he thought. But he was also conscious of the status he enjoyed in
“Cciety and did not want to come across as too eager to ask questions
‘bout Baba Farid to a person who was not part of the family and that
Mei who declared openly that he was neither a Hindu nor a

- That would have been detrimental to his ‘spiritual status .
© also wasn't sure if Nanak actually was as profound a thinker as
Farid. Only one poem could not clarify that. So he sent Kamal back

wi


“el NHOOlCl uh com,
126 WALKING WITH NANAK

to him with a question. As Kamal disappeared beyond the boundary

« . a] ® q a
the city into the jungle, Sheikh Ibrahim looked down from the sy ey
of his courtyard, wondering what Guru Nanak’s reply would be mm

There is One God,

But two paths: Hinduism and Islam
Which one 1s acceptable?

Which one is to be rejected?”

Kamal posed his question to Nanak. This was not the firs
Nanak was being questioned about his controversial statement tha
there is no Hindu or Muslim. The questioning had begun at the court
of Nawab Daulat Khan Lodhi at Sultanpur. It was then asked again at
the court of Malik Bhago in Eminabad. His friends and family had al
asked him this question at Rai Bhoi Di Talwindi.

t time that

SO

God is One,

The Path is One.

Accept the Path of Truth
Reject all other ways.

‘Subhan Allah! exclaimed Sheikh Ibrahim when Kamal narrated Nanak
reply to him. No one had ever answered this question so succinctly.
There was much simplicity in these lines, which was no longer found in
religious doctrines, both Hindu and Muslim. The Path of Truth is the
only truth. And what is Truth?

The Truth is what Sheikh Ibrahim had thought about several times
in his meditation. It was that if he had been born in the house of 4
Hindu priest, he would have been one of the most ardent followers of
Hinduism. Simple as the Truth may sound and easy its path, it usually
falls victim to complexities of religion. Truth is an intuition that cannot
die, but it can be suppressed by the burden of life and expediency. Those

®Trilochan Singh, Guru Nanak: Founder of Sikhism; a Biography (Delhi
Gurdwara Parbandhak Committee, 1969), page 108
“Thid.


www.sikhbookclub.com

Se erat: |

THE INSPIRATION
127
who are able to cast away the web of prudence and stare at Truth once
gains 38 they did at the time of their birth, become Saints, Mahants,
Sufis, Gurus and Bhagtis. There was no doubt in Sheikh Ibrahim’s mind
that Nanak too was an enlightened soul who had passed through the
ordeals of spirituality to uncover the beauty of Truth in its utter simplicity.

‘We shall meet this Saint who has composed such a beautiful poem,’
said Sheikh Ibrahim.

‘But how can you do that, Master?’ objected the Diwan. ‘He is a non-
believer. What will your followers think if they find out that you went
to meet a non-Muslim Bhagti in the jungles? They would not respect
you anymore. They come to you for answers. You have all the answers.
What would you ever ask the Bhagat?”

‘The man who composed these words cannot be a non-believer. I
believe you have not thought about the profound nature of this poem.
The writer here is a True Believer and all Muslims should try to be like
him. He believes in Tauhid, the Oneness of Allah; therefore, he is not a
pagan and is to be respected according to the tenets of Islam. You perhaps
may not have questions because you have shut your mind to knowledge.
I,on the other hand, am a curious soul, which is a characteristic of a true
believer and therefore I have more questions than answers.

The Diwan was offended by the Sheikh’s sharp reply. In the spiritual
hierarchy, he was lower than the Sheikh. This status was not determined
by their personal attributes but by the religious and social importance
of the shrines they were the heads of. The shrine at Tiba Haji Deen was
older than the shrine of Baba Farid at Pakpattan, but it was less important.
The importance, in this case, was determined by the number of followers
each shrine had. The Diwan respected the Sheikh and accepted him as
his spiritual overlord but he was not used to being rebuked. This was
the first time the Sheikh had spoken to him in such a sharp manner and
the Diwan could not hide his embarrassment. He decided to stay in the
shrine while Sheikh Ibrahim and Kamal left for the forest.

Sheikh Ibrahim too was surprised by his reaction. He was a true
viGiin of Baba Farid in his politeness. Be ta pie
aes language. Following his practice, Shei rahim too }

ised this habit of talking sweetly to all. This was the first time


Wu

eh IK Club.com,
ttn fhe aK CIUb.com,

128 WALKING WITH NANAK
he had spoken to anyone in a sharp manner. He was wel} aWare ,
decorum that his status demanded. Even though he disapproved at
myths that had been created out of the life story of Baba Farid a the |
not like that Sheikh Ibrahim and all Baba Farid’s other descendant, te: |
treated as divine beings, he did not object because he understood _
religious and spiritual requirements of ordinary beings. He knew th.
one could uplift humanity temporarily, as the Prophet and Saints fig
but after them, humanity always falls back into the same trap thar thes
holy men took them out of. He knew that an ordinary individual Wn
simply not capable of understanding the complexity of religion and he
Truth. It was for this reason that the simple nature of Nanak’s Message
resonated with Sheikh Ibrahim. In his philosophy, Nanak had been able
to summon all the complexities of religion that Sheikh Ibrahim Wanted
to teach his followers. It was this frustration with his position in sociey
and the attitude of society that had resulted in an outburst. .

Nanak was seated on a small mound, a few kilometres away from
the city and the shrine. From this spot, Nanak too could see the forest
around him and a few houses on the outskirts of the city. However, in
comparison, this mound was much smaller than the one on top of which
the shrine of Baba Farid was situated.

After initial greetings, Sheikh Ibrahim questioned Nanak about his
religious identity. Having grown up in an environment of institutionalised
religion, he was not accustomed to the fluidity of religious distinctions
that Nanak represented.

‘If I say 1 am a Hindu, I would be telling a lie. I am also not a Muslim.
I don’t accept the differences between Hindus and Muslims. In fact, |
do not accept any difference based on any creed, sect or religion. Isnt
the body of both Hindus and Muslims made out of the same elements:
Doesn't the spirit that pervades them belong to that One God who
also responsible for judging everyone’s deeds? He who serves One G
sincerely and truly, receives light and grace from Him. The virtues “A
noble deeds of both of them are blessed by God while the wicked dee :
of both of them are condemned and punished by Him.I ama servant”
God and a brother of true devotees, no matter to which creed they vet
Nanak and Ibrahim continued to speak for a long time

t

—


Www, siich ct

THE INSPIRATION

129
sardana and Kamal listened. Sheikh Ibrahim narrated Baba Farid’
nyt Nanak, and Nanak expressed immense appreciation for the
ample yernacular in the poetry of the Sufi. Sheikh Ibrahim had never
eqcountered anyone who had understood Baba Farid’s words with as
“quch accuracy as Nanak. He decided to share his dilemma with Nanak.
fe garrated to him a poem of Baba Farid:

[f someone smites your ‘face, O Farid,
Return him not a blow for blow;
Nay, Kiss his feet who smites you;
Forgive him, and go home in peace.

‘How, oh Nanak, can one ever be so humble?”
‘What amazing words, said Nanak. ‘I have to admit that in my travels,
[have never come across any Muslim alive or dead who has understood
the essence of Islam as much as Baba Farid has. He is the true follower
of the Prophet Muhammad (PBUH).’

‘How so? asked Sheikh Ibrahim. Tt is this humility of Baba Farid that
[fail to reconcile with Islam. Islam asks us to fight oppression and always
stand up for one’s rights. How can one adhere to Islam's philosophy of
jihad (struggle) and also believe what Baba Farid is saying?

‘My friend, that is because you have a cosmetic understanding of the
religion. The essence of Islamic spirituality is different from what appears
to the eye. Isn't it true that a pagan woman used to throw rubbish on
Prophet Muhammad every day when he would pass under her house?
The Prophet could have changed his route, but he did not. Why do you
think he did that? Because he wanted to teach that woman through his
humility the power of his faith. Had he rebuked her, the woman's hatred
would have been provided with a personal reason. One day, when that
woman failed to throw rubbish on him, the Prophet visited her house
to find that she was sick. He took care of her, as @ result of which she
Converted to Islam.’

" For the first time, Sheikh Ibrahim was able
arid’s philosophy. He was elated by the spiritu

understand Baba

to truly
t the same

al poetry but a

la
Singh, Guru Nanak: Founder of Sikhism, page 109


WALKING WITH NANAK

130
w he had embarrassed himself by his own os
Uct

time he realised ho
He decided that he would apologise to him fort

towards the Diwan.
intolerance as soon as

‘O Nanak, there is anot
understand. If you may permit,

he returned. i
her poem of Baba Farid that I ca,
Not

allow me to recite it to you.’

You did not launch your boat
When the weather was pleasa
Impossible tt is to set sail
Now, when the sea waves storm and rave;
Touch not the flaming flower,

The flower of worldly desires.

You will be burned in scorching fires.

On the one hand I am weak and frail,

On the other hand I am deprived of His grace;
As spilt milk cannot be regained.

Alas, I may not meet the Lord again.

Says Farid, Listen my friends,

The beloved will send a call,

The soul shall have to depart,

Leaving the body to mingle with dust. 45

nt ana calm,

Nanak contemplated the poem for a little while and then said that it was
a beautiful poem with multiple layers of meaning. It captured a message
that could only be expressed in poetry. He told him that he would not
explain to him the meaning of this poem right away, but soon he would
write a poem which would answer Sheikh Ibrahim’s question.
ide mn ve Sheik speaitita both did not realise that the sun had
Mardana ; ey sat there in conversation. Ibrahim invited Nanak and
ay ae ne to the shrine where they could stay for a few days.
Here the - inn ean left for Baba Farid’s shrine.
had forgotten iw: it ae Diwan, who by the time the Sheikh returned,
hehitieet out the insult. Taking the lead from his spiritual mastel,
€d respect upon Guru Nanak and even invited him to com

ingh, Guru Nanak: Founder of Sikhism, page 110


THE INSPIRATION

13%
nd with him fora little while at his shrine. After a few days, wh

: ¢ ae > ” . 4 ° ‘ i % Fh

in was ¢ Nanak to leave, he took Sheikh Ibrahim to one side anid

. had composed a poern that explained Baba Farid’ poem

wif)

jhim that he
hat Nanak recited that day before leaving:

stay
ime for

tole
‘This 18
Laut rch ye the boat of austere contemplation,
With which it is easy 10 cross the rough ocean,

Sp smooth becomes life's journey,

No storm, no tempest can obstruct thee.

‘the Divine Name is the flower

Of eternally fast colour;

My whole being is dyed in tt,

Omy Love, My Beloved!

How can the seekers true

Meet the beloved Lord?

If you have some virlues,

He will meet you of His own accord.
He who attains this spiritual union
Will never know separation.

The cycle of birth and death will cease,
When the true Lord ts one with Thee.”

Sheikh Ibrahim was delighted to hear Nanak’s response to Baba Farid.
He asked his scribe to compile on a parchment all the poems of Baba
Farid, which he then handed to Nanak. It was through this channel that
the poems of Baba Farid found their place in the Guru Granth Sahib
and were preserved for posterity. Earlier, the poetry of the Muslim mystic
was passed orally from one generation to another but it was through
Guru Nanak that they were preserved for the first time in written form.

98

M bs pe . e Py “~ .
laybe Nanak’s fascination with Baba Fari
Ww: . * eo

ith Nanak. Soon after his visit t0 Pakp

s similar to UF fascination

d was
attan, Nanak turned towards

Singh, Guru Nanak: Founder of Sikhism, page iii


WwW

ww.sikhbookclub.com

INTRODUCTION

I had always been fascinated with Guru Nanak, before I had even read
a single word written by him or about him. Guru Nanak was someone
who was so near and yet so elusive. Having been born and brought up
in Pakistani Punjab, I had heard of Guru Nanak—about him being
the founder of Sikhism, about him being a poet and about him being
a spiritual leader. Yet given the Muslim-dominant culture of Pakistani
Punjab, there were no avenues available for me within the culture to
explore his personality. He was on the one hand someone who was my
own, being a Punjabi, and yet on the other hand, he was an alien, since
he was a non-Muslim. When I did eventually read books about him I
was disappointed. I was disappointed because even after reading several
books I did not feel I had the slightest clue as to who Guru Nanak was
as a person or what his life was like. This was particularly disheartening
because he had lived only five centuries before the present day and there
have been better records of people who had lived even before that time.

I truly discovered Guru Nanak for the first time through my mentor,
Iqbal Qaiser. We spent several hours talking about him, his poetry, and
this gave me a much better idea about Guru Nanak as a person, compared
to any book that I had read. Iqbal Qaiser recited Nanak’s Babur Bani to
me, a long poem that Nanak wrote at the time the Mughal marauder
Babur attacked Punjab, destroying the cities of Eminabad and Lahore
on the way. The poem was riveting. It had a huge impact on me and I
saw for the first time glimpses of the man I had been trying to discover.
Here was a man who is considered a religious figure, the founder of
Sikhism and a believer in God and then there was this poem of his


WALKING WITH NANAK

the village of Tibba Haji Deen, whose name was Kothewa} When New.

must have visited it around the end of the hfteenth century, This ic Whe,
Baba Farid was born in the year 1173 CE. That house is Preserved
in its courtyard are the graves of the Muslim saint’s ancestor, Poin,
back seven generations. Baba Farid’s parents are also buried here. .
I met a man called Ghulam Shabbir, whose family has been Serving ths
shrine for the past seven generations. Magical stories of the saint ani
his ancestors are passed from generation to generation in his family ang
narrated to the devotees. Had Nanak never recorded the Poetry of the
Saint in the Granth Sahib, I have no doubt that this man stil] Would

have remembered every poem by heart.

Nanak must have visited this courtyard containing the gTaves of
the ancestors of Baba Farid and must have met an ancestor of Ghulam
Shabbir as well. Perhaps they sat here discussing the Poetry and
philosophy of Baba Farid.

Not far from this house is another shrine dedicated to the childhood
of Baba Farid. This is a well, located within a house, covered from the
top with an iron cage. Devotees tie pieces of thread on this railing as
supplication. A caretaker pulls up water from the well and serves it to
the devotees. This is considered sacred water and js believed to cur
all diseases. According to the legend, Baba Farid hung himself upside
down in this well for forty days as part of his chilla, which is a Sufi rite
of passage to harness spiritual prowess. Because of his presence, this well
and its water became sacred.

Iqbal Qaiser and ] stood there at the edge of the well, marveling
at the naiveté of the devotees and the cunning manner in which the
caretakers extracted money from them after offering them sacred watet.
Nanak too must have witnessed a similar sight. Would Nanak have
created a scene here, challenging this religious concept or quietly walked
away like we did, not offending the religious sensibilities of the people

here?

In
Nanak, constructed by his devotees years after his visit to this village. ©

honour the memory of his arrival. At a wall next to the entrance ther
was a plaque which stated that the gurdwara had been renovated of

Bo ae


THE INSPIRATION 133
dK

_, ogders of the Prime Minister of Pakistan in 2008. This was another
pnt Quiser's success stories that he had not known about prior to
se The last time he had come here, the gurdwara was in a pitiable
_. dvided and shared by families that had been ravaged by Partition.
+ knocked on the door, not sure if I would be allowed to visit the
_jding. An old man who must have been in his late seventies, greeted
_. hospitably. He told us that all the previous encroachments had now

> ot
> ys we

wen removed and there was a single family, which was his family, living
ier, in a room next to the main building. They too were migrants from
india and had been living here since Partition. Now they had been given
che job to protect the shrine by the Augaf Department.

‘Baba takes care of his shrine himself,’ he told us. He opened the
joor of the main shrine. Staring back at us from the darkness inside was
, geture of Guru Nanak wearing a saffron chola.

" ‘Whoever now comes and tries to sleep inside the shrine, Baba beats
him up in the night. I have seen it with my own eyes,’ he assured us.

Taking off our shoes, we circled the room almost religiously, as if it
was an essential feature of our pilgrimage. ‘I can't really imagine Baba
Nanak beating up intruders with a stick,’ I said to Iqbal Qaiser in a
sarcastic tone. He shook his head in frustration, which he usually did
when repulsed by the superstitious beliefs of people.

We climbed to the rooftop. The entire building had been covered in
yellowish paint. We were standing under its canopy-like dome. There
must have been frescoes here once, like at the Gurdwara of Jhaman as
the architecture of this building was a replica of that one. From the roof
we could see the surrounding areas of the village. In front of us was the
shrine of Maha Chawar, the Hindu brother of Princess Kangna, who
“onverted to Islam and was then persecuted by his own kinfolk.

Standing on top of the shrine, I asked Iqbal Qaiser if he too, like
ei that people like Baba Farid, Guru Nanak, Shah Hussain, Bulleh
he and Waris Shah have become a part of his existence, where it is

“Htcult to differentiate between one’s own personality and their influence
*" one’s character.
Tris inevitable,’ he said. ‘Once you read their poetry and philosophy
alee detail, they become a part of your existence. Where the self ends
y begin is hard to tell.’

if


be ren

way de. vookclub.com,
etree en ca A
134 WALKING WITH NANAK

Shah Hussain’s verse ‘I have been chanting the name of Ra njha
that I m yself have become Ranjha, call me Ranjha, there is nobo dy ,

9
“My,

: ’ . . With»
name of Heer here, had never been clearer to me. Did Fariq bee th
OMe,

part of Nanak?

Since we were here, we also decided to visit the shrine of Mas
Chawar, the most important pilgrimage site of this village. We Wer rr
to one of the guestrooms behind the shrine to meet with the vine.
of this shrine. The guardian, a young man in white shalwar kamee, .
‘none corner of the room, while his entourage sat around him. His ook

; Bold
watch and black shoes shone in the afternoon sun. His car was parle;
outside in the verandah with a customized number plate. We were told
that several Sikhs had started visiting the shrine of Guru Nanak eve
since its renovation. There were two festivals celebrated at the shrine
one which corresponded with the Islamic calendar and another whict
corresponded with the local calendar. ‘| have not seen it with my own
eyes but I have been told by my elders that the Sikhs also used to arrange
their festival at the gurdwara at the same dates as that of the urs (death
anniversary of a Sufi saint) of Maha Chawar. Every year there used to
be a kabaddi (a South Asian sport) competition between the Sikhs and
the Muslims.’

I wondered if the celebration of the urs according to the local calendar
is a roundabout way of continuing to pay homage to the legacy of Guru
Nanak, since the festival of Guru Nanak used to correspond with the
festival of Maha Chawar. These were after all the indigenous people
of this village and their association with the Gurdwara of Nanak went
beyond the petty politics of India-Pakistan, of being Muslim and not
Muslim. After pretending for a little while that we were unaware of the
history of the shrine and getting unbiased opinions from the locals, Iqbal
Qaiser decided to share his knowledge about the connection betwee"
Baba Farid and Guru Nanak.

‘But weren't they contemporaries? Guru Nanak and Ba
asked the government official from the Augaf Department

was seated there.
‘Not at all. There was a difference of three hundred years

them.’

ba Farid?

be twee f


en ae

www, sikhbookclub.com,

THE INSPIRATION 135
The transmission of history through the oral medium as opposed
written sources follows its own logic. Often the tales are devoid of
_jstorical authenticity but encoded within them are several themes and
-jues that need to be deciphered. According to this tradition, Baba Farid
ind Guru Nanak are presented as contemporaries, not in the dimension
of their time period but because of the similarity of their philosophies.
This is the traditional way of depicting their shared spiritual legacy.

In Benaras, where Guru Nanak visited, there are legends that Nanak
met Kabir but that too is historically not proven. However, local legends
reinforce what can also be discerned from an analysis of their poetry—a
ghared spiritual tradition.

There are several similarities between the poetry of Farid and Nanak.
It is Farid who first uses the symbolism of a wife being abandoned by
her husband to represent the relationship between devotee and deity. In
Nanak’s poetry, the wife as a symbol is also used several times, depicted
to be dressed up for the arrival of her husband, who never comes. There
is also supreme sadness in their symbolism.

Baba Farid is considered to be the first poet of the Punjabi language
and at several points in his life, Guru Nanak gives the example of Baba
Farid to other pretentious Sufis. He appreciates the fact that Baba Farid
wrote for the people in a language that they could understand, when
the language of the educated elite at the time was Persian and Arabic.
Nanak, like Farid, also chose Punjabi as his medium of expression. It is
for this reason that this language of peasants was given the status of a

holy language after Sikhism as a religion was institutionalised.

Guru Nanak was impressed by the fact that Baba Farid lived a life
of simplicity and shunned violence. Similar to Guru Nanak’s poetry,
one can find ideas about religious syncretism in Sheikh Farid’s poetry
as well. The Chistiyan school of thought in Sufism, of which Baba Farid
Was once the head, is one of the most syncretic sects of Islam. One of
their hallmarks is the qawwali, which is the Muslim version of bhajan.

Once Baba Farid found a place in the Guru Granth Sahib, his

eras | and shrine became holy for the followers of Guru Nanak as
rie year, hundreds of Sikhs and Hindus travel to Pakpattan to
Y Romage to the shrine of Baba Farid.

to


Sy ee fe ono ckclub.com

WALKING WITH NANAK

9

The shrine of Baba Farid is the focal point of the city of Pakpaty
roads lead to this spot, 0 hich also happens to be the highes
the surrounding areas. This was an abandoned mound, probably Carry)

within it the secrets of an ancient city, when Farid moved here with he
students, Now it is a shrine spread over a vast tract of land. One knoy,
one is getting closer to the shrine by the names of the shops that thc

an, /

appearing on both sides of the road. All of them are named after Baby
Farid or his tithe Shakarganj.

From Tibba Haji Deen we travelled to Chistiyan, a smal] city
which was established by Baba Farid’s son and named after his school
of thought, according to legend. From there, we travelled to Bahavwal
Nagar where we spent the night and then in the morning, headed to
Pakpattan, the distance to which can be covered in an hour and q half
by car. At a main roundabout which three roads dissected, we had the
option of either bypassing the city of Pakpattan, travelling to the centre
where lies the shrine ot Baba Farid, or travel east towards the surrounding
villages of Pakpattan.

‘Take this route,’ said Iqbal Qaiser, pointing towards the road that
was in the worst shape of all of them. This was because it headed in the
direction of the least important destination, at least in the eyes of the
contemporary world. We were on our way to Tibba Nanaksar, a small
village about five kilometres from the shrine of Baba Farid. ‘This village
was constructed around the Gurdwara of Guru Nanak. The gurdwarais
perched on top of a small mound, which is why it is called Tibba.’

What was now thriving agricultural land was once a jungle. According
to tradition, Nanak met with Sheikh Ibrahim on this mound and it was
here that the latter presented Nanak with the poetry of Baba Farid.

The Gurdwara of Guru Nanak was visible from afar. It was a yellow
building with a white dome. We drove all the way to the base o! the
mound from where the village also began. As a cloud of dust followed
the tracks of my car, so did a group of children from the village, 8°

naked, others wearing shabby clothes. They stopped next to us and starte

j nme i at . . ; us
Jumping in excitement at the arrival of a break from their monoton?
routine.

|
t
é
'
t
|



Wow. sikhbookchub,com

RENE ach

THE INSPIRATION W?
Label Qaiser was shocked to see the condition of the

gurdwara, Tt
ty painted, while there was a lock

wegen , | at the entrance barring anyone
gaunt ENRETIAR ‘L believe this to be another contribution of my book,’ he
aid int pride. .

A child told us that the keys of the gurdwara were available with the
amily living across the shrine. We knocked tor a little while but there
seas HO ANSWEE We walked up the street and entered a mosque w

, hich was
next to the gurdwara, A tew labourers were working on the re

novation
af the mosque while a young man was supervising the job. This mosque
was built around the shrine of a descendant of Baba Farid by the name
af Baba Fateh Ullah Shah Noori Chisti. We asked the young supervisor
fhe could help us enter the gurdwara but he was reluctant. There were
clear signs of irritation on his face as soon as we mentioned that we had
come to see the gurdwara,

“There was no boundary wall between the gurdwara and the mosque,”
Iqbal Qaiser whispered into my ear as we left the mosque to try our
luck knocking at the door of the caretakers of the gurdwara once again.
‘Slowly, the guardians of the mosque were taking over the property of
the gurdwara, Naturally, they are not happy that the gurdwara has been
renovated and protected.’

After a few knocks on the wooden door with triangular patterns, a
woman and child peeped from behind the half opened door. They agreed
to open the gate of the shrine.

The gurdwara stood in the middle of the courtyard, which had also
been recently renovated. It was a single storied structure with a single
room. There was nothing inside it. Around it were several rooms which
were once part of the gurdwara and used as a residence for pilgrims.

ty had not been renovated and were a reminder of how the gurdwara

ad once been,

A lot of Sikhs come here,’ said the woman, who had the key to the
ance. The gurdwara was in a bad condition but it was renovated by the
°vernment a few years ago. Now we have been given the responsibility
‘© look after the maintenance of the shrine.’
hile walking down the mound towards the car, Iqbal Qaiser

0} : . » th:
Pointed to the houses that were in front of the shrine and told me that


wb avookclub.com

Www ud.

138 WALKING WITH NANAK

ty

this area had once been the property of the gurdwara. The entra
the gurdwara was right at the base of the mound, There nig
pool within the premises and a langar hall, all of which was lost bey
encroachers. What was finally salvaged and renovated by the ( lovin 0 the
of Pakistan was a fraction of the original holding. omen

‘This was a fairly important gurdwara, which is why it ha. be
preserved. There was a lot of pressure on the government by expat Sip
and even by the Diwan of the shrine of Baba Farid to renovate ti,
building, which is why the government eventually succumbed. If this he
been the treatment meted out to one of the most important shrine, ;
Guru Nanak in Pakistan, one can imagine what would happen to those
which are not as important,’ said Iqbal Qaiser, as we drove away on ot
way to Lahore, leaving behind us another cloud of dust.


A CURSED LOT

The dark clouds of the monsoon slowly spread over the blue sky. Then, as
aichly 2s they had appeared, they disappeared, leaving me in uncertainty.
Would i rain or wouldn't it? Would it rain in Lahore or would it rain in
Kasus? Only the previous night I had arrived from Islamabad where I
had recently moved after my marriage. Working while I was in Lahore
was easier. 1 world just call up Iqbal Qaiser, tell him what I wanted to
see 2nd off we would go, the next day. Now that there was 2 distance of

Seay ee fe rere ; 7 fans
oe a 1 Ge



m
co

4
pm NS A ANDRE

LKING WITH NANAK

WA

140
; oli t his standing next to
4 seriousness that implied tha 6 MY Car was Tigy

welcome anymore. a |

‘May God bless you, he said, limping away. Softly singing a Pure,

he raised one of his hands with his finger pointing towards h. jabs
re that God was listening.

unperturbed by my rude behaviour, did} g.

Nanak’s words rang in my ears: ee |

der

inc he EMEP RONAN NEN INE NRIOL +"

song,
as if to ensu

Only once he had left,
guilty about what I had done.
As a beggar goes a-begging,
Bowl in one hand, staff in the other,
Rings in his ears, in ashes smothered,
So go thou forth in life.

With ear-rings made of contentment,
With modesty thy begging bowl,
Meditation the fabric of thy garment,
Knowledge of death thy cowl,

Let thy mind be chaste, virginal clean,
Faith the staff on which to lean.

Thou shalt then thy fancy humiliate,
With mind subdued, the world subjugate.
Hail! And to Thee be salutation.

Thou art primal, Thou art pure,

Without beginning, without termination,
In single forever, forever endure. id

‘Sorry, I am late,’ said Iqbal Qaiser as he jumped into the car. He had jus
arrived from his farmhouse in district Kasur. He had chosen to spent
the night there because our destination was closer to his farmhouse ;
to his Lahore house. We were on our way to Kanganpur where there *
a gurdwara in honour of Guru Nanak.

‘How far are these two villages from each other?’ I asked him,
drove away from the looming monsoon clouds.

‘Not very far. About five to ten kilometres.’

What I don't understand is how is it that the people of two ¥

gs We

“Singh, trans. Hymns of the Gurus, pages 23-24



“uw sikhbookclub, con

A CUMRED Lot ‘4
|

jy ti are situated so close to each other have such differe
W itt

. nt attitudes?
how can everyone ina villaye have a simil

jpeoill®s ar attitude?’
eis true that EYETYONE Wh a village Cannot have

jit you will have to agree that certain places have

it

iot be the attitude

4 similar attitude

4 particular attitude,
Lah . of everyone there but it could be the
ver whe lite attitude of a village or a city’

ty my head, | was already comparing the

attitudes of people in the

iiew of Lahore and Islamabad, It was still too soon for me to form an
{ k

apinion about my new home but | could not deny the fact that there
wav a different fecl to both the cities,

‘Layree with you that different cities have different attitudes. Take
talarnabad and Lahore for example. I feel that the drivers of Islarnabad
tend to be much more courteous than the drivers of Lahore. But then
Lahore and Islamabad are about three hundred and fifty kilometres away
from cach other. Itmight as well be a different « ountry. But in the case of
Kanganpur and Manakdeke which happen to be only a few kilometres
apart, how can people have such starkly different attitudes”

‘Itis possible for the people of these two regions to have opposing
attitudes, Kanganpur was a big village bordering a small city. That is the
way it is even today, While Manakdeke was and still is a small village.
People of cities and villages tend to have different attitudes.’

“That makes sense. As a city becomes part of a larger economy
there is a tendency for it to become more individualistic as opposed to
collectivistic, Notions of hospitality and tradition don’t really matter
inymore. You know what I find really interesting in this entire tale? It

is that the story of Nanak at these two places is part of history now. The
people of Kanganpur have forever been stigmatised because of a small
ncldent that happened with Nanak. I feel that this was harsh on the
Part of Nanak,’

‘Nanak could have said or done nothing. It is likely that this incident
ver took place,’ said Iqbal Qaiser.
© skirted the old city of Kanganpur. Like the rest of the ancient
what " South Asia, its walls had been demolished. Only ve grad "
the hae must have been entrances to the city remained. e climbe
‘und on top of which the city was perched. There was a Muslim

Citiey


Veww own bookclub.com
Neamt at a re NSN R BES IOAN MIME too

INTRODUCTION

which lays the blame of Babur’s wrath at God's feet. Through his poem
Nanak challenges the divinity of the Divine and asks if this bloodshed j,
the blessing that God had promised. This man might as well have been
the prophet of those who questioned the existence of God. I realized
that one way of getting to know Nanak better was through his poetry.

My fascination with Guru Nanak increased further when I learned
on my travels with Iqbal Qaiser that he had spent a major portion of his
life in present-day Pakistan. He was born here. He initially preached his
new religion here by travelling around this region and eventually settled
in a small village which is now on the Pakistani side of the border.

Wherever I went to see gurdwaras raised in the memory of Guru
Nanak, I felt his presence around me. I could see him sitting with Bhai
Mardana, his Muslim companion, oblivious to our presence and detached
from the world around him. In my imagination, ] began visualising
Iqbal Qaiser and my journey as an extension of Guru Nanak and Bhai
Mardana’s journey. We too travelled like vagabonds, learning the ways of
the different people we met on the way. We too engaged in philosophical
and religious discussions and despite our intellectual differences,
adored each other's company. It was through this understanding of our
interactions, struggles and experiences that I was able to make sense of the
experiences of Guru Nanak. For me then the second way of discovering
Nanak was by walking with him. I wasn’t interested in Nanak the saint
but in Nanak the son, Nanak the father, Nanak the philosopher, Nanak
the poet and Nanak the wanderer.

Discovering Nanak should have satisfied my curiosity; however, it
only exacerbated the situation. I began seeing the contradictions between
Nanak the man and Nanak the saint. Nanak vehemently spoke against
organised religion and yet today, the religion that is attributed to him is
one of the most prominent organised religions in the world. He abhorred
the concept of associating miracles with religious personalities, but today,
his biography is nothing but a story of his miracles. On his deathbed, he
appointed not his son but his most loyal student as his spiritual successor.
‘This was a clear indication that Nanak did not want his legacy to become
a legacy based on kinship, but on intellectual and philosophical heritage.
However, only a couple of successors down the line, the institution ot


- Se te ne

Wie’ y, «20 9kClub.com

142 WALKING WITH NANAK
shrine in front of us. Next to it was a police station. In one come;
dilapidated building, which was the gurdwara constructed inh W
Guru Nanak’s visit to Kanganpur.

On the facade of the building, there was an inscription in Gunma
that recorded the name of the devotee who had paid for the constr, uk

of this structure in the nineteenth century. He too must have 7
from Kanganpur. Before Partition there were quite a few Sikh “
Hindus here, now it was dominated by Muslims. There are Both
of ‘Untouchable’ Christian quarters around the city but the low-cace
Christians are politically and socially weak. On one side of the gurdwan,
a hole had been carved out of the wall which is now used as the entra, .
into the building. The name of a police inspector was written on top of
the structure. ‘Is this where that incident with the police inspector too)
place?’ I asked Iqbal Qaiser.

‘Which incident?’

‘When the police official beat you up?’ I asked.

Iqbal Qaiser often narrates to me the stories of the travels that he
has undertaken. A lot of the trips were done for his book Historical Sikh
Shrines in Pakistan. He told me that working on that book wasn’ easy.
‘The travel that you do is nothing compared to how I visited all these
shrines. I would travel on public transport and then walk for miles to
find a place. Most of the time I didn’t even know if the gurdwara was
still standing.’

In one of these narrations he told me that he had once visited 4
gurdwara. After photographing the building, which was being used asa
house, from the outside, he knocked on the door to ask for permission
to also photograph it from the inside. A woman emerged from the
door. When she saw that Iqbal Qaiser was carrying a camera, she began
shouting. Hearing her screams, a man came out of the house and without
listening to a word of what Iqbal Qaiser had to say, started to beat him
up. The entire village gathered around but no one dared stop the ma”. ae
even took away the camera and removed the roll of film from it. L a
another man from the village, who had witnessed the entire event, t0°

Iqbal Qaiser to his house, where he first attended to his wounds ip
then offered him water and tea. He informed him that the person bs

ag
q

ee ee Cy ee ET ST

Noy, ro a


A CURSED LOT

143
neat UP Iqbal Qaiser was a police inspector. He had illegally
the surdwara and was running it as a brothel.
‘No, that was Mandi Bahauddin,’ said Iqbal Qaiser

‘That is such a disappointment,’ I replied. ‘Had that been this
wyrdwara, it would have added a really interesting twist to my story a
this building. a

A few people from the neighbourhood gathered around us and
started questioning us about the purpose of our visit. One of them, Aslam.
who was clearly a drug addict, followed me into the building. There was

nay on the ground. ‘Is this for animals?’ I asked him.
|" ‘No, This building is now under the control of a police inspector.
Every year, he comes for the festival of the Muslim shrine next to this
zurdwara. He brings other devotees along who are then accommodated
in this gurdwara. The hay is used as bedding.’

‘How old is the Muslim shrine?’ I asked our guide.

‘It's very old. It is older than the gurdwara.’

That seemed doubtful.

‘Can I climb onto the roofs of one of these houses to get a better
photograph of the gurdwara?’ Iqbal Qaiser asked the men surrounding
us. There was awkward feet shifting and reluctant replies.

‘The houses are locked,’ said one of them.

‘The view is also not nice. It is the same as this one.’

‘There are no stairs.’

‘What do you expect of the people who treated Nanak the way they
did? I joked with Iqbal Qaiser as we walked away from the gurdwara,
towards the alleys of this ancient city.

98

Chotu, as he was known to everyone, ran to his othe
were playing a game of checkers on the ground, using tiny sticks snd
Pieces of rock. All of them were naked except for one who was weann&
a lungi (a Zarment roughly like a sarong). All the hair on his head looked
€cently shaved except for a tiny lock that had been left hanging on the

-ftside as a supplication for the well being of the child. Dust rose from

pocupied

r tiny friends who


www.siknbookclub.com,
Renner remem sneer errata recs nth

144 WALKING WITH NANAK
the ground as Chotu' little feet stopped next to the game, careful
not to mess up the arrangement of stones. ‘Come quickly, he Prong
‘There are a couple of thugs sitting on the edge of the City. The

come to rob us.

¥, 86 a

‘Who told you that, Chotu Ram?’ said Ramesh mockingly: he i |

the eldest of the boys in the group.

‘I heard the 4a/wai (sweet-maker) Krishna Maharaj saying that ty |

the grocer Mithan who sits next to him. Both of them saw the thugger,
equipment these villains are carrying with them. | also heard them saying
that they know black magic and can disappear into thin air. With thas
magic they can enter anyone’s house and take away all they want,’

‘I don't believe that,’ said Ramesh. ‘Even if they can disappear, how
can they take away all the things they steal? Those things would not
disappear and how would they get out of the house?”

‘If you don't believe me come see for yourself. Maharaj ji and Mithan
have gone to warn the other villagers of the evil designs of these liars,’

The group of children ran towards the eastern side of the city where
Nanak and Mardana were camped. They kept their distance from them
as they waited for the rest of the city dwellers to gather. They observed
carefully, trying to find any sign of deceit in the actions of these two
men. Nanak and Mardana did not notice them. They sat under a berry
tree, Nanak, with his eyes closed in mediation, while Mardana tuned his
tubab. There was nothing else with them.

Only a few days prior to the visit of Nanak and Mardana, a group
of jogis wearing saffron cholas had come to the village and by displaying
the tricks of their religiosity had hoodwinked many innocent villagers.
It was after this incident that the elders of Kanganpur decided that they
would never entertain any other holy men in their village. Through the
actions of the jogis they were convinced that this was Kalyug and the
age of holy men was over.

‘Where is their magical equipment? They look like religious
mendicants to me.’ said Ramesh with disappointment.

‘Oh Ramesh, why do you have to act like a grown up all the time!
replied Harish, a boy who was as old as Ramesh. ‘I am sure they have
hidden everything behind the tree. Don’t you know they are thugs?

= Me feet
a Ree

UNced |
y have


miww.Sikhbookclub. com |

A CURSED Lor

145

"They are pretending to be mendicants, Why would Maharaj say they
© are charlatans if he did not know better? I am sure he saw something.’
D the rest of the gang nodded and agreed with Harish.
© The halwai and the grocer ran to the centre of t
4 banyan tree stood. Usually, a few people were al
4 They warned them about the thugs who had co
| the village. Stories were narrated about how someone had seen them
© ay ng in the air, while others had seen them disappear. Questions were
"raised as to whether they were holy men instead of being practitioners
_ of evil as was being perceived but these thoughts were quickly cast away.
' From the centre of the city, emissaries were sent to all corners of
: Kanganpur to collect more people to chase away these thugs. There was
© no doubt about the occult powers of these strange men, so the villagers
_ wanted as big an assembly as possible.
Nanak and Mardana had no idea about the storm brewing against
_ them. They had arrived earlier in the morning after visiting the city of
_ Lahore. After completing their journey east, which went all the way to
a Bengal, both of them had headed south where they had crossed the sea
_ and entered Sri Lanka. Years after they had left Talwindi, both of them
* decided that it was time to go back home. On their way back to Punjab
_ they reached Lahore, from where they came to Kanganpur, which was
a village near the city of Kasur, the twin city of Lahore.
4 Throughout their journey they had never encountered the kind of
hostility that they were to face here. Nanak had ruffled a few feathers
everywhere but these were usually of religious leaders who were soon
___ won over by Nanak’s mesmerising words. Never had the entire population
. : turned against them. The opposition that he encountered throughout his
__ Jurney was also different from the kind he was to receive here. During
His journey, he had challenged religious dogma and ritual at Hindu
temples and Muslim shrines, so the disagreement he encountered had
been Philosophical. Here, they were to be accused of something they
iad never been accused of before. = aS.
Hundreds of people headed to the eastern side of the city, picking
4P pebbles, rocks and anything else they could find to throw at these
‘Struders, Children were asked to stay indoors. Some, too curious for

he city where a giant
ways gathered there.
me from Kasur to rob


WA Wd xhnbookclub.com
A. na remap eciy vocal

146 WALKING WITH NANAK

eee sie ROE

climbed the roofs to see what was going to }

their own good, ; |
astructed to shut all the PPen, Ih, |

women of the households were it Wind
doors. In case these thugs performed any magic, it would not os an
enter the houses this way. € able ty
Chotu and rest of the gang hid behind a peepal tree nea; i
and avoided all grown-ups. They knew that if they were caught the 5
would be send back. CY too
‘Go away, monsters, came a shout from the centre of the group, ¢
away before we kick you out of this place!’ P.Go
Even before Nanak and Mardana could respond to the allegati
of the group, someone started to throw rocks at them. Partially bruised
Nanak and Mardana decided to leave the place where they were te

welcome.

sf

We walked through an empty bazaar. What was once the centre of the
city was now an abandoned outpost. The hub of the city had moved to the
new part of the city that was constructed after the arrival of the British.
The city of Kanganpur is expanding and I cannot help but wonder if
Guru Nanak’s prophecy is coming true.

Kanganpur is an ancient town that traces its origin back to Princess
Kangna, the Hindu princess of Chunian at the time of the arrival of
Muhammad Bin Qasim in the eight century CE. She is believed to
have been martyred along with her brother, Maha Chawar whose shrine
we visited in the last chapter, by members of her own family, after they
both converted to Islam. There is a small fort on the outskirts of the city
now out of reach, because it has been taken over by the army. This fort
is known as the fort of Kangana.

Iqbal Qaiser stopped in front of an old shop. There were remains of
paintings on the back wall. The text underneath them confirmed thet
they were of Guru Nanak and Bhai Mardana. The people of Kanganp™
did eventually acknowl Sir cissevice uaa Wem ing aon

y edge the ‘divinity’ of Guru Nanak. Walking 2%
the road that forms the circumference of this ancient city, We reache
shop of Abdul Ghaffar Razi, an old friend of Iqbal Qaiser. Ghafla

as written a book on the history of Kanganpur and its surrounding?


- MER I paar IE
w ; eee
—W:sikhbookclub.com

Gurdwara Rori Sahib at Jhaman




Gurdwara Janamasthan where Guru N

Www. sikhbookclub,com
Sener. ene ond

Gurdwara Tambu Sahib
where Guru Nanak hid
from his father after

Sacha Sauda

JIsteQ) Feqdy]

anak was born


—_—=—=_——=--

(rardwars Ror Sah a Fence

“ " 5 gst
aed the ste fron whore Neca &
Marana were itaprienned by the Somces ot Reghegs



—
re

maw sikhbookclub.com,

/
Gurdwara Malji Sahib at Kanganpur from where Guru Nanak and
Mardana were turned away by the people of this town

g

G

Ss

UrdWara Tibba Nanaksar
Te Nanak met with
Sheikh Tbrahim


Wg

INTRODUCTION at

‘Guruhood’ became a family affair, with all the Gurus hailing from the
same family and drawing their legitimacy from Guru Nanak, calling
themselves reincarnations of the first Guru.

8

The Janamsakhis are Sikh texts on Nanak’s life, written by his devotees
after his death. These are the primary sources we have on Nanak’s life.
These Janamsakhis, however, don't give us a clear picture of Nanak’s life
story. What they give us is a collection of Nanak’s encounters with various
people throughout his travels, recording the stories of his miracles. There
are also different versions of Janamsakhis, which make it difficult to sift
the truth about Nanak’s life.

By drawing from his Janamsakhis, his poetry and my travels along
Nanak’s path, I have attempted to create a brief picture of Nanak’s story,
his beliefs, his strengths, his insecurities and his resilience. This part of
the book is fictionalised. It was not possible to incorporate all the stories
associated with Nanak into this book as I wanted to experience all the
tales first-hand through travel to write about them and with my limited
resources it was not possible to go everywhere Nanak had been on his
travels. My research was limited to a few areas in Pakistan and therefore
only a few tales from the Janamsakhis have been included in this book.
My aim was not to dissect each and every tale associated with Nanak
but rather to understand, holistically, the religious and philosophical
ideas of Nanak.

Within this fictional part of the book that attempts to narrate
Nanak’s journey, I have attempted to interweave the story of my own
travels. In the spaces that appeared to be empty as a result of these two
worlds coming together, I have put in the stories of the miracles and
magic that were attributed to Guru Nanak, to see Nanak through the
eyes of his devotees.

"The second section of the book looks at the history of Sikhism after
the death of Guru Nanak. It traces the history of the instirationalisation
of this religion through the stories of the Sikh Gurus and their devotees.

In doing so, the book juxtaposes the philosophy of Guru Nanak and the






”

eit . * hy



wviw.sikhbookclub.com
A CURSED Lor 147
/
here was an ancient banyan tree in front of his shop, under which

spore was small grave. This grave was protected by a boundary wall and
was clearly being used as a shrine, Several loiterers sat on top of the long
ranches of this sacred tree. “This must have been a Hindu temple, | said
wy Iqbal Qaiser ‘As is the case with several other shrines, it must have
been converted into a Muslim shrine after P
she changing landscape of religiosity.’

“fhat’s not true,’ said Ghaffar. I wasn’t sure if there was a hint of
repressed rcligious sentiment hidden behind his statement. That was my
initial reaction but he was a self-proclaimed socialist who acknowledged
eventually that he had kept up certain features of Islamic religiosity to
make his left-leaning messages accessible to the local people. “This was
nota Hindu temple. This is an ancient graveyard. In the early days, people
ysed to find human skeletons buried under the tree.’ 1 didn’t want to
challenge the authority of someone who had researched the history of
his region but Iqbal Qaiser did not share my sentiments.

‘If there were human skeletons then I am afraid this was not a
graveyard. This rust have been an ancient mound, said Iqbal Qaiser.

‘Really? You think so?’

I was told later that Iqbal Qaiser helped Ghaffar with his project and
therefore was regarded as an authority on the subject of history. “Where
were the different Hindu areas in the city? asked Iqbal Qaiser.

“The Hindus were everywhere. Even in this area.’

‘Since the site of this banyan tree was also a Hindu region, we could
say that there could have been a Hindu temple here.’

Ghaffar did not argue back, not because he was convinced but because
by now tea had arrived, Looking around sheepishly I picked up the cup
of tea and placed it on a table. It was the month of Ramzan and it was
lorbidden to eat in public and here we were sitting on the road having
‘cain the middle of the day.‘Don’t worry about it. Have it, ’said Ghaffar.
My eyes tried scanning the expressions of a bearded old man who passed
by walking along with his bicycle. He didn’t look at us. Was he fasting,

Wondered? In a little while, one of the men sitting under the tree lit a
“éarette and the rest of the group followed. Seeing them smoke in public,
00 relaxed. Such display of non-fasting would be almost impossible in

artition, to accommodate


W Lys «ndDOOKClub.com.
 enemennmmmemmm tid |

148 WALKING WITH NANAK
here everyone wears their religion on the;

wn like Kanganpur, it was possible. IT Slee,
Id help us get the property of the gurq
said Ghaffar. After finishing tea we had moved to a small room Wara,
hack of his shop. A door from here led to the courtyard of his be the
This was a room that served as a boundary between his domest;, "se,
public space. Tt has been under the control of this inspector for the and
few years. Under him the gurdwara has suffered immensely. You i
have seen its condition. We want to preserve this shrine.’ ~

‘What exactly do you want to do?’

‘We want to establish the office of our organisation at the gurdwar,
We also want to a set up 4 small library there and encourage research
on Kanganpur.’ Ghaffar is a member of a literary organization, which js
a collection of local socialist poets. ‘This gurdwara is part of our history

and we want to preserve this history.
Ghaffar was probably in earnest about his vision but I grew sceptical
in Pakistan, this one too had

of his motives. Like other gurdwaras 1
vast property attached to it, which technically came under the Augaf

Department. In reality though, it was under the control of local usurpers.
Just the property of the gurdwara itself was lucrative. I wasn't sure if
getting the gurdwara freed from one occupier and giving it to another

a city like Lahore, w
but here in a small to
‘Iqbal Sahib, you shou

group was a good idea.
‘We are discussing whether to forcefully take over the shrine. We'll
just sit there with a few men,’ he suggested.

’ warned

Don't do that. Things would get really messy in that case,

Iqbal Qaiser.

‘Should we approach officials from the Augaf Department and tell
them about the precarious condition of this shrine?’

‘You should write a letter to the Prime Minister of Pakistan. Copy
that to the Chief Minister and Chairman, Augaf Department, 'said Iq
Qaiser. ‘In your letter you should say that this gurdwara is part ° i
village’s history and we want to preserve it. For reference you could als
send a printout of the page from my book that mentions this gurdware

‘I could also send a few pages of my own book,’ said Ghaftar. He wen!
into his house and emerged with two copies of his book. The pict¥* .

this gurdwara was on the cover.



me,
a

A CURSED LOT 144

syes, that’s a good idea. Once the lerters reach the Prime Minsster,
members of the Augaf Department will come to you directly and
«gy how t0 gO about the renovation. In the end they will give you
7 of the shrine itself and ask you to look out for its maintenance.’
oe , abl Qaiser's idea seemed to excite Ghaffar and the discussion about
seriting the letter continued for a lithe while. The more they planned, the
iess nterested I became in their conversation. I slowly immersed myself
in my thoughts, where I imagined Nanak and the people of thss city.
Would you like to ask Ghaffar any questions? Iqbal Quiser asked
diverting the topic of discussion. | asked him if he thought Nanak's
«ment of the people of this city was a true reflection of the facts.

W

Dejected at the behaviour of the people of Kanganpur, Nanak and
Mardana headed east. Mardana was stressed. He was surprised at the
weatment meted out to them. He couldn't understand why the villagers
had reacted the way they did. He had neither asked anyone for food
nor had they vet preached their message. Nanak was calm as usual, as

wanted to ask him but he remained quiet. There was an awkward silence
between them on account of the encounter.

Sensing Mardana’s uneasiness, Nanak said, “May the village of
Kanganpur prosper!’

7

Git * no doubt that the city of Kanganpur bas prosperé. said
the Bt of the locals continue to live within Kanganpur.’ During
Ontish era,a railway station was built here, leading to the rise of a
l won't market town, which continues to burst with activity. “However,
Gane xo at the people of this city are ill-mannered. I Bebeve shat
Nanak was a bit harsh in his assessment. In fact I feel that it is

the
People of Manakdeke who are known for their bad manners. As


AN ene

WwW Li
=.

150 WALKING WITH NANAK
Nanak predicted, they have scattered everywhere and the Village

the verge of extinction. Wherever they have gone though, the ; On
brought disrepute upon their village. They are known to commis ave
crimes like stealing sandals and the shirts of other workers at fac
where they work.’ ties
| wasn't willing to accept anything being said by Ghaffar F

‘ ” or me it
was his feelings against the villagers of Manakdeke that were o,..

- : . COmin
out. This was perhaps due to the fact that their minor village was extol

as opposed to this major market town. Then I wondered if maybe my
own biases were leading me to form opinions against the people of thic
city of which Ghaffar was the only representative I had interacted with,
Maybe in trying to validate Guru Nanak’s analysis, I had already made
up my mind.

What would the Sikhs in Kanganpur have thought about the verdict?
There are none left to check with. All that remains of this community
are abandoned houses and shops which have now been taken over by
victims of Partition and the land mafia.

After a little while, we were led towards another gurdwara by a young
friend of Akram Rehan, who happened to be a poet. This was a gurdwara
that had been raised due to the demands of the local Sikh community,
after the population of the city increased. We parked our car in front ofa
mosque, which was being extended by labourers. I was told by our guide
that this mosque belonged to the Ahle-Hadith school of thought, the
puritanical sect of Islam similar in ideology to the Wahabis of Saudia
Arabia. To counter Iranian Shia influence, the Saudis have pumped
money into Pakistan and funded these puritanical schools of thought
since the Iranian revolution. It is because of this influx of money that
their political strength in recent years has grown, which is reflected in
the size of their mosques. “This used to be a small mosque only a few
years ago. Look at its size now,’ our guide told us.

We walked into a narrow alley and headed straight towards the
gurdwara. The gurdwara now serves as a residence for a Muslim family
and there was a lock at the entrance. We were told that the occupiers ae
not home and no one had any idea when they would be back. Wallin
back, Iqbal Qaiser whispered into my ear, ‘The only difference in recent


ee

Yow »ithbookclub-com,

A CURSED 10%
i$
wis that earlier this street was called Gurdwarewali Gali (lane)
hiss called Masjidwali Gali.’ )

Now it
9

‘The journey from Kanganpur to Manakdcke was short. It took about
avent minutes for Nanak and Mardana to get there. There was a
ark difference between Kanganpur and Manakdeke. Kanganpur was
yotected by a wall and there were several hundred houses within. Some
were several StOreys high and visible from afar.

The rulers of Kanganpur lived in a fort a few metres away from
she city. Being the only protected community in the area, Kanganpur
erved as the unofficial regional capital. Whenever villagers from other
yeas were harassed by marauders and looters, they would take refuge
behind the walls of Kanganpur. The marauders refrained from attacking
Kanganpur because it had a small army of its own and besides, it wasn't
easy seizing control of a walled city.

Manakdeke was one of those small villages that were regularly
harassed, It was a collection of a handful of houses, surrounded by open
fields, a few of which belonged to the landlords of the village while the
rest belonged to the aristocracy of Kanganpur.

_ Nanak and Mardana walked through the streets of this village,
followed by a group of naked children. A few ran back to their houses
totell their parents that a couple of jogis had come to their village. Soon
the crowd behind Nanak and Mardana increased. Older kids and women
walked behind the kids, keeping a respectable distance. No one knew
why they were following them but everyone seemed to be doing it and
that was reason enough in a place like this.
, As soon as Nanak and Mardana stopped at a sm
“W houses, the group of women following them gave t
“drink, Childr hop to get t
Lulab jaya en ran to the nearest sweet st opt 4
duo and n.Ina little while almost the entire village surroun
tligions started asking them questions about their journey an
— Matters,
a must be tired,’ said Ghasita Ram,

all mound next to a
hem fresh water
hem /adoo and
ded the
d other

a Hindu landowner from


a milena

www _sixhbookclub.com.
“Spleens Here ntmeoneIer tment

35) WALKING WITH NANAK

the village. He was a respected man in the community becaye,
cordial relationship with everyone. ‘Let me arrange for bed dic, Of hi,
house,’ he suggested. 5 0 my,

The rest of the men too wanted to extend their hospitality to the:
men but they did not, respecting Ghasita's offer. There was an thins
limites

supply of food for the travellers. Some brought forward saag and maka,
}i roti while others brought dal and roti. Nanak refrained from wt,
too much but Mardana ate without a break and soon could not nee
Both of them then decided to rest for a little while at Ghasita’s house
When it was time to leave Nanak turned towards the villagers ani
said, “This is a hospitable village and it was an honour to stay here. I ho
that this village never prospers and remains small. May the Villagers of

Manakdeke scatter from this place to the different regions of the world!

98

Iqbal Qaiser asked me to stop in front of an unassuming door. There was
a small building behind it, made of thin bricks. The village of Manakdeke
is still a small village like Nanak hoped. A young boy came out of the
door and when we told him that we wanted to see the gurdwara, he
invited us in. His family now lives at the place where Nanak is believed
to have stayed. After his visit, Nanak’s followers constructed a gurdwars |
at the spot, which now serves as the house of this Mewati family, who
moved to this village after Partition.

The gurdwara was a single room with a charpoy in the centre. Next
to it was a fandoor (a clay oven) where an old woman was tending the
fire to prepare roti for lunch. There were other rooms on one side of the
gurdwara. These too were being used by the family.

‘You have come here earlier as well, haven't you?” asked the wom?
who was working at the tandoor.‘A Sikh woman and a boy were with you

‘Yes,’ said Iqbal Qaiser.

‘Can we offer you some tea or food?’ she asked. ,

‘No, thank you,’ said Iqbal Qaiser. ‘We just wanted to photog?”
the gurdwara.’

‘It is not a gurdwara anymore,’ she said. ‘We are too poor t take ci


www.sikhbookclub.com

A CURSED LOT sa
afthis building. Please write to the authorities in the city to renovate
, structure. It is now in poor condition and might fall down anytime.’
Our trip to Manakdeke was short. We left after taking a few
th otographs. On the way back to Lahore I asked Iqbal Qaiser about the
Sikh woman and boy the old woman had referred to. ‘It is an interesting
gory. A few years after my book, I was visiting this place when I saw
4 sikh woman and her son here. The boy came to me and asked me if
j was Iqbal Qaiser. He was carrying my book in his hand and told me
shat they had come from England. With my book as their guide they
planning to visit the gurdwaras of Pakistan. I then came with them

thi

were
to this gurdwara.

@

Confused by Nanak’s enigmatic response to the behaviour of the people

of Kanganpur and Manakdeke, Mardana asked him why he would wish
prosperity for the people of Kanganpur who had been hostile to him and
curse the second village, where the villagers had been so kind.

That js because I don’t want the people of Kanganpur to spread to
_ other regions. Wherever they go, they are likely to spread ill-will and
hatred. I have prayed for their city to prosper so that they remain within
its walls. Whereas I have prayed for the people of Manakdeke to spread
to other regions instead of remaining confined to their village, so that
wherever they may go they should be able to spread their goodwill.’

‘Strange are the ways of the Guru! said Mardana.


~ eer

WA eg, agnnookclub.com,

INTRODUCTION

politicisation of the religious philosophy of Sikhism as the institution
Guruhood rose in prominence and influence. of
Towards the end of the book the various open threads of the book
come together, similar to Nanak’s concept of Oneness through Monism
The story of Nanak, the Gurus and us, converges at Kartarpur Sahib,
where Guru Nanak lay on his deathbed, breathing life into a new religion

Haroon Kyauip


www.sixhbookclub.com,

10
GURU HARKRISHAN

Guru Har Rai was aware of his failing health and knew that he did not
have much life left. He also knew that if he died without appointing
Harkrishan as his successor, Ram Rai would be successful in appointing
himself as the Guru. So about fourteen days before his death, in front
of his loyal followers, Guru Har Rai appointed his six-year-old son as
the next Guru. Guru Harkrishan became the youngest leader of the
Sikh community.

Before his death, Har Rai made the child Guru promise that he
would never engage in Mughal politics. It seems that Har Rai had leamed
from his mistakes. During the internecine war between the Mughal
princes, Har Rai had backed the losing horse, Dara Shikoh. Aurangzeb,
his chief opponent, emerged victorious and after establishing himself on
the throne in Delhi, he summoned Har Rai to explain his association
with Dara Shikoh. Guru Har Rai then sent his elder son, Ram Rai, to
Delhi.

According to Sikh tradition, Ram Rai succeeded in allaying the fears
of the Emperor but in the process went overboard in pleasing Aurangzeb
and ended up misinterpreting some of Nanak’s philosophy. He did
earn the approval of the Emperor but ended up offending his father
who disowned him. On his deathbed, instead of appointing his elder
son, Guru Har Rai appointed his younger child as the Guru. Ram Rat
who had his own group of followers, rebelled against his father an

—_


eee ee

Www. sikhbookclub.com

GURU HARKRISHAN

x ged t0 challenge the appointment of a child to ‘Nan
» 48

shrone « ch version of the st
Fg Si Story puts the blame of Ram Rai’s

jjsassociation with the Sikh community on the actions of Ram Rai
Howeveh there a another point of view that explains why Guru Har
Rai appointed his younger child as the Guru, even though his elder son
ys, due to his age, 17 8 bettas position to handle the affairs of the seat
This version is recorded in A History of the Sikhs which states that Ram
Rai was the son of a handmaiden and not of a wife of equal stature to
Harkrishan's mother.*” At the time of Harkrishan’s ascension it was clear
that the institution of Guru had become a Sodhi family dominion and
hence if the son of a handmaiden was raised to the status of Guru, it
could have tarnished the entire institution.

During the short tenure of Guru Harkrishan, the Sikh community
asawhole saw some major setbacks, which explains the immediate steps
ken by Guru Tegh Bahadur, when he replaced the child Guru. By the
ime the mantle of Guruship was bestowed upon Harkrishan, the Sikh
community had expanded beyond the confines of the Punjab into places
is far as Kabul and Ghaznvi. It was therefore becoming increasingly
iiicult for the Guru to have some form of central control. To administer
the Sikh community, Guru Hargobind had created the concept of the
Sangat, which was then put under a Masand, who was responsible for
he Guru and the Sangat.

e influence of Ram Rai and
had started paying more

ak’s pontifical

maintaining a connection between t
Sikh historians record that due to th

the threat of the Mughals, many Masands
attention to their own interests. P. S. Grewal also talks about this in his

article ‘Nanak’s Doctrine and the Feudalization of the Sikh Gurudom’,
in which he records that reports of corruption by Masands poured in
ttom various parts of the country. Grewal blames unchecked power as
the main reason for this sort of corruption. In the same article he points
°ut that the institution of Guruhood at this time had also become feudal
"nature, with large tracts of land under its control. This is ironical
“Thisterm is used in TBe History ofthe Sikh Gurus Retold by Surjit Singh Gandhi

Cunningham, A History of the Sikhs, page 108


www ishbookclub.com
‘Baten a ee a aca {

ny, WALKING WITT NANAK

heeatuxe Sikhism is seen as 4 reaction against the feudal |

and gy
: They
alotot historians Ihe way a young child was Rit

UPPOInted toy
th

) this Onin:

' we S opir

abolished by Guru Gobind Singh wl cL
“wh

or this reason that devout Sikhs be

of Punjab by
lead a reliyous commune
Ihe Masand system was
established the Khalsa, [tis
purged Sikhisin of corruption,

Ran Rai exploited to the ft
Harkrishan, He used his former connections with the Masands tO sptead
rumours that his father had ,
this strategy did not vield results
to make use of his connections with the Emperor, which had been the
initial cause of the estrangement with his father. He made it known t,
the Emperor that Harkrishan had wrongfully placed himself on the
seat of the Guru, whereas his father had appointed him (Ram Rai) as
his successor. He also told the Emperor that Sikhs all over the country
acknowledged Ram Rai as the true Guru.

After listening to Ram Rai’s complaints, Aurangzeb summoned the
Guru to Delhi. This put Harkrishan in an awkward position because it
meant presenting one’s case to the Mughal court and hence associating
with the Mughals, something his father had strictly warned him against.
On the other hand, the risk of defying the Emperor could result in
imprisonment. In this precarious situation the Raja of Jaipur, Mirza
Raja Jai Singh, came to the rescue of the Guru and assured him that he
would provide protection to the Guru. Raja Jai Singh also offered the
hospitality of his house to the Guru.

Marching from Kartarpur and stopping over at various places on
his way to meet devotees, the Guru reached Delhi with a handful of his
most loyal supporters. His mother, Mata Sulakhni, also accompanict
him, to verify, if need be, to the Emperor, that her husband, Har Ra
had bestowed the seat of the Guruship to Harkrishan and not Ram Rat

Once in Delhi, the Guru was in no hurry to meet the Emperor! ¢
stayed on for weeks, during which he used his time to me
Sangat of Delhi. During the Guru's stay in Delhi, cholera br
the city. The Guru, along with his devotees, spent time in wor
the afflicted people. In the meantime, the Emperor, using his inte

y of a large size only reinforce

en he
lieve he

illest the weaknesses of the rule of @
Satta

appointed him as his successor, Howeve,
and the disgruntled son soon decide
cide,

et the Si

oke out ®
king Wi"
Ihigen?



a

GURU HARKRISHAN 157

ing the growing popularity of the Guru i
Fi obser" othe Sikh community regarded Harkrish
aise’ hat He dismissed the petition of Ram Rai by giving hima Jjagir
got Ram A ant) where the city of Dehradun was later established. In
 peadal oi vor Aurangzeb too acknowledged that Guru Harkrishan
Pps ways ee of the Sikh community.

_ m Guru was still in Delhi, chicken-pox broke out and the
wie . "alicted by it. It was clear to the Guru and his followers
Guru f00 Was ould not be able to pass this ordeal. One day before the
| char the wes sae he gathered all his followers and told them that their
| Guru passed id be found in Bakala. In this indirect manner, Harkrishan
; UD <

n the city of Delhi,
an as their Guru and

wis


www.sixhbookclub.com,
peinliaindnipiw ea

11
TWO PAISAS WORTH OF TRUTH

The evening prayer was beginning at the temple of Puran Bhagat
faint sounds of Punjabi songs being sung in

Mardana could hear the
honour of this ascetic. He was overcome by a rush of nostalgia. As q
younger man, before Mardana had devoted his life to the cause of Nanak,

he would roam the cities and villages of Punjab, singing folk songs and
legends. One of the most popular legends that he used to sing about

was that of Puran Bhagat.
Puran Bhagat was the son of the King of Sialkot, Raja Salivahan.
well on the orders of his father

As a young child he was thrown into a
when it was suspected that he had made sexual advances towards his

young step-mother, the latest wife of the king. The child was recovered
from the well by a group of ascetics and while living with them, he too
became an ascetic. Eventually, he confronted his father, the king, and it
was due to his blessings that the king was bestowed with another son
who eventually became Raja Rasalu, another folk legend that became
popular with the Mirasis.

The well of Puran Bhagat was at a little
Sialkot. A temple had been raised by the devotees of Puran Bhagat aroun
his well and in this way the legend was provided with a site of worship
This was the most important temple in the ancient city of Sialkot, who
origin was also linked to the story of Raja Salivahan. It is believed t*
Sialkot was founded by this king, whose son was Puran Bhagat. ml

distance from the city of

_


PW PALAS WORTH OF rey ii
159
dreds of devotees athered ;
dav pundr % ‘dat the temple of Puran By
"  wongs sedis ated to hirtn. ) Dihagat to
if, ‘

‘These sonige WEFE fot only famous around this
¢ folk religious identity

ai

of ¢ region but had slowly
Whe rest of the Pyni

oe far away ae ; > Punjab as well,
sey were SUDE as far away a6 Amritsar and Multan, where local dial
unique flavours to the Lory, —

ui wd inte thy

snparted

Mardana ne ai n i Sialleon prior to this visit. After roaming
rind the Lahore al id Kasur region, Nanak and Mardana decided to visit
the city #1 the foothills of Jammu where this ancient temple was located
Mardana wanted to visit the temple of Puran Bhagat immediately u on
wrival, 00% duc to his religious convictions but because of the memory
puciated with t he legend. This was one of the connections that Mardana
had with his past life, before he had met Nanak. This reminded him of
what he was and what his life could have been, had he not abandoned
Ai for the cause of Nanak. He asked Nanak if he too would want to
wait the temple but Nanak refused. After a long walk from Eminabad
where they had stopped to meet with Bhai Lalo, Nanak and Mardana
tad reached Sialkot. Nanak was tired and wanted to rest. He spotted a
gant berry tree not far from the city and decided to rest under it.

Had Nanak known that the visit to the temple of Puran Bhagat
neant so much to his friend he would have accompanied him but he was
unaware of the chords of nostalgia that were being struck in his friend’s
heart by the sounds of the bhajans and folk songs. He had planned to
visit the temple the day after.

Both Nanak and Mardana sat quietly under the tree. There were a
few scattered houses and shops around. Nanak sat with his back resting
on the tree and his eyes closed. He was meditating, a technique he often
wed to cope with his tiredness. It also helped him revive the motivation
within w travel and discover more.

_ Aworan in her early twenties walke
her little daughter. Looking at the way she was dressed, one could tell
that she was a Hindu woman. Namaste Maharaj, she said to Nanak and
Mardana After her prayer she drew a small piece of cloth from ae
‘ati and tied it to a branch on the tree. Alll the while, her little daughter

Many
“micked her mother.

d towards the berry tree with


166 WALKING WITH NANAK

As she circled the tree, chanting Vedic prayers, Nanak and.
doserved ber without comment. On finishing she touched Nani
Moardand’s feet, also asking her daughter to do the same,and Wea thing’
walk away when Nanak stopped her and asked her about het whereabous
Chae tie od in a house nearby and often came to this tree to Pray. She »
him that 2 number of people from the community regarded thi, old
to be sacred, as holy spirits resided in them. She came here regulaty
pray for a son. : :

“That's not true, O holy mother,’ said Nanak. ‘Spirits and Gods dg
not reside in tivers or trees. They reside in a devotee’s heart, You dor}
have to walk away from your home and your loved ones to Bet closer tp
God. God is where there is love and you have love at home’

‘The woman, in a hurry to get back to her house before the even:
fell, listened to Nanak patiently. Mardana knew that in this Particular
case Nanak’s sermon was falling on deaf ears; however, Nanak continued
Masdana was getting more and more frustrated as Nanak spoke. He
could see the contradiction in his words. He was exhorting the womant
Stay at home to find God, whereas he was travelling the world in search
of divinity. If God is where there is love then why did Nanak leave his
__ When the woman left, Mardana could not help but ask Nanak about
sion for ancient customs and traditions.Who are we to tell them

ty believe in is false when their ancestors have be iev 2



St

TWO PAISAS WORTH OF TRUTY
161

ee there is NO striving and pain in her effi ,
Tt te

pecans
ah She. like sO many others, takes the journey that eae the path of
Jr gthout questioning. All | want her to do ‘ Sine pine 4
HK, Cn beyond

“a che has been taught to think.’

Mfardana gave UP his effort at dialogue. He once agai
eg Bis melancholy mood. Nanak on the other hand ; _ receded
int > nd, had gliransed
M aqgion that his friend and most loyal companion w ei apsed the
jcturbed him and he could no longer meditat as going through.

j age 1. te as before. After .
“je while he said, ‘Mardana, here take four paisas. G After a
jf ‘cas h of truth P . Go to the city and
pur me _ worth © ; ruth and two paisas worth of untruth.’
Mardana did as he was instructed. .

He wandered through the streets of Sialkot aimlessly, not sure how t
sgrerpret the instructions of his mentor. He knew that if he spon ac hed
, shopkeeper with the request he would be ridiculed but on che other
hand he did not want to disobey Nanak. He had accepted Nanak as his
eternal guru a long time ago and vowed to fulfil all his wishes and desires
even though Nanak did not expect such a form of devotion. For Nanak.
Mardana was a friend and an equal, never a devotee.

“ir, can I get truth worth two paisas? asked Mardana, as he
approached a shopkeeper. Handing him four paisas, he continued, ‘For
the remaining two paisas, please give me untruth.’ The shopkeeper looked
back at him not knowing if this was some sort of a joke. Looking at
Mardana’s clothes, which was a white chola, he could tell that he was
i religious person, a fakir or a dervish and one could expect all sorts of
weird requests from such people. Putting the money in his till, he offered
him a few sweets and some salt. “This sir, is truth,’ he said referring to
the sweets, ‘and this is your untruth.

‘That is a lie,’ said Mardana. “These are mere ea
tuth or untruth. I want my money back.

Mardana went to a couple of other
thooed him away from the shop, while ot
him things to eat and drink and then politely
‘ure what to offer to the fakir.
vo one street corner, Mardana found a vendo |

£ son sat next to him, while he sat Jost in his ow

con

qhat

tables and hence not

shopkeepers, some of whom
hers welcomed him, offering

saying that they were not

r selling dry fruit, His
n world. Mardana


Www aixhbookclub.com,

162 WALKING WITH NANAK
FA

had given up hope of buying truth and untruth for his Mentor by y

and was heading back to the berry tree. The shop was not far from a
Nanak was seated. For some inexplicable reason Mardana felt day,
towards the vendor. ‘Bless you, little child, he said as he passed hic be
over the little boy. ‘Your son 1s adorable.’ and

‘Namaste Maharaj,’ said the vendor. ‘May I offer you some dry fruit?

‘No, thank you, kind man,’ said Mardana. ‘Here take these four Daisas
and please give me truth worth two paisas and untruth for the remaining
two paisas. The vendor looked at Mardana dumbfounded for g little
while and then taking the money he disappeared into the shop. He
returned a little while later with a piece of paper in his hand and asked
Mardana, ‘Kind sir, will you be buying truth and untruth for yourself?

‘No, replied Mardana with a light laugh. ‘I am the companion of g
wise man called Nanak, who is sitting under the berry tree not far from
here.’ The vendor nodded, expressing that he knew where the berry
tree was. ‘He has asked me to purchase truth and untruth. I have been
walking the streets of Sialkot like a madman and nowhere have | found
what my master has asked me to look for.’

The vendor handed the piece of paper to Mardana and said, ‘Here
you go. I have given you truth worth two paisas and untruth worth two
paisas. Take this to your master and tell him that there is one vendor in
the city of Sialkot who deals in the commodities he is looking for and
his name is Maula Karar.’

‘Life is false,’ was written on one of the chits that was sold to Mardana
by Karar, while the other one read, ‘Death is truth.’

A glow appeared on Nanak’s face as he read what was written on the
pieces of paper. He asked Mardana about the vendor who had sold him
the paper and then requested him to arrange for Nanak to meet him
After a little while Mardana reappeared with Maula Karar, who walked
with a straight back, taking steps which were sure of himself. Nanak
noticed that despite his confidence there was humility and wisdom ™
his eyes. Nanak stood up and greeted his guest. “I

Nanak and Karar sat under the tree, engaged in conversation, i
a evening. Mardana was no longer in a gloomy mood and was rate
enjoying the conversation. Nanak questioned Karar about this area


www.sikhbookclub.com

TWO PAISAS WORTH of TRUY
H
163
. here. He asked about the various shr

, eople . . ines he
he f eof each one of them. He was told abs S here and about the

anc
import “the mos ; ut the shrine of
. - one of the most popular saints of Sialko He Of Hamza

t, which was not far

U ; : :
> oy were seated. ; .
from where me | ‘ : , ew kilometres from Sialkot th
4 . s > te) y y ! o6 ] . . 7 eTe Ww
nother shrine belonging to Mian Mitha, another important M lim
WIUSHIT

gervish from the region Banal asked Karar if he could show Nan;
\fardana these shrines, to which he readily agreed. Nanak and
"The three of them travelled together for the next few d:

- and the religious practi 7 ays, exploring
she region ane bi Bees PRAMS of people living there. They became
giends during this period and made plans to travel more once Nanak
eeurned from his trip to Sindh. Karar had enjoyed travelling and
exploring these ig t few days and was eager to accompany these holy
men for the rest of their journey. ‘ ;

After their short excursions to the neighbouring shrines they returned
once again to Sialkot after a few days. Karar went back home and Nanak
tinued his journey along with Mardana.

Several years later, after travelling through various new countries and
regions, Nanak decided that it was time to revisit his old friends. He
érst went to Eminabad, where he met Bhai Lalo. Sialkot is not very far
fom Eminabad and so Nanak decided to also pay a visit to Maula Karar.

Karar was seated in his shop engaged in a discussion with a wholesale
vendor who wanted to buy a large order of food from him and sell it in the
rest of Punjab. It was the middle of the day and the streets were empty.
Karar heard the sound of Nanak’s wooden sandals from afar and saw
his old friends approaching. He was delighted to see them but then he
thought about his promise, which was to travel through Punjab together,
i ptomise that he was no longer interested in fulfilling. |

In the years between when they first met and now, Karar’s business
bad thrived. He was now busier than he had ever been and was making
‘lot of money. His products were travelling to faraway regions. This was
de to the fact that a couple of wholesalers were now doing Pasi
with him. Karar felt that this was the worst time for him to leave his

! iness on his
business. His eldest son was still too young to handle the business on h
eral years. Karar thought

OWN, even though he had been trained for sev “+h him gone, they
; ut his family and came to the conclusion that with him gone, Me)

con


“3! shbookclub.com,

THE PROPHECY

Decades of poverty, vulnerability and rejection were tucked away neatly
under the folds of the old man's skin. His hand trembled as he extended
it. His shirt was slashed. It too had aged along with its wearer. He had
folded his legs under his body, seated on this ancient staircase.

Of all the other beggars sitting on the way it was this old man who
had captured the attention of Tripta. Maybe it was his age, in complete
contrast to her youthful vigour. She felt as if his staring eyes sucked the
youth out of her skin. She ran the back of her hand over her cheek to
make sure it was still young. It was sweaty.

A breeze blew across the mound, taking away her perspiration and
her anxiety. It was not the old man's stare that had mesmerised her, but
her own vivid imagination and emotional state. As if waking up suddenly
from a nightmare, she untied the tiny knot at the edge of her dupatta
and placed two silver coins on the beggar’s palm, who gripped it strongly,
feeling the weight of the coins. After making sure they actually existed,
he thanked her.

To her surprise, he looked sadder compared to before she had handed
him the coins. It was as if the realisation of his poverty had just dawned
upon him. A little offended by what she perceived to be the insolence
of the beggar, she turned away from him and headed further up, to the
summit of the mound. She never learned anything more about the beggar,
not even the fact that he had once been a rich merchant from Lahore


www.sixhbookclub.com
etn tens ELC HAN EEN NBIC I ad

WALKING WITH NANAK

164
Sending the wholesaler away fora ue wae, Kea shu down
shop and went home, which was behind the shop. : told his ip :
ina little while two men would appear at the door asking for him, g°
should tell them that Karar was away on work and would return see,
days later, His wife also remembered the last time Karar had disappear:
for a few days when these two men came. She too did not want Kars

ife tha:

to leave again. a

When Nanak knocked on the door, Karar’s wife emerged ang told
them what she had been instructed to. She was not good at lying ang
hesitated as she spoke. Both Nanak and Mardana, who had by now
travelled the world, knew that Karar was evading them. They left Without
telling Karar’s wife that they knew that he was hidden in the house 2}
this while.

While his wife was lying to his friend, Karar, afraid of the truth being
disclosed, was hiding in the store room, where he used to store food fo:
the household animals. Here in the hay, there was a snake escaping the
harsh winter outside. When it felt that its place had been invaded, it bir
Karar, who died on the spot.

Just as Nanak and Mardana were about to turn away from the street of
Karar’s house, they heard the sound of his wife crying out. They returned
immediately to find out that Karar was dead. His wife admitted to deceit
and asked for Nanak’s forgiveness.

"You are a holy man. You knew all this while that we were lying and
it is because of this lie that Karar has been killed. Please pray to God
that he be returned.’ Karar’s wife did not know that Nanak could not
perform any miracles.

“This is the man, who taught us about truth and falsity, the last time
we came, said Nanak to Mardana, but Karar’s wife was also listening:
‘Isn't it sad that today he forgot what he said that day?’

After spending a little while with the distraught family and taking
part in the final rites, Nanak and Mardana left for their next destinatio*.

Mardana, I have composed a new poem,’ said Nanak. ‘T’ve beer
meaning to tell you ever since Karar passed away but I thought it w°

: have been Inappropriate to recite it sitting at Karar’s house.’ Then without
waiting for Mardana to speak, Nanak recited the poem:


SN bOOkcIUb com
TWO PAISAS WORTH OF Tru
H

Frien dship with a money-monger
1; false and leads to falsehood:

You knew not O Maula,

Where death would overtake you.>©

8

S Iabal Qaiser and I drove down the newly constructed motorwa
| shat connects the Grand Trunk Road with ;

? . Sialkot. After our visit to
Eminabad we were now heading to Sialkot. Nanak too must have
» followed a similar route.

Sialkot has become one of the most important cities in Pakistan.
A number of industries have been set up around this region which is
the reason for the rise of this place as an economic centre. So powerful
- is the business community of this region today that it has financed its
~ own airport, which now handles international flights, responsible for the
export of products made in Sialkot. This newly constructed highway has
also been financed by the business community, members of which travel
frequently between the three important cities of Lahore, Gujranawala
and Sialkot. I noticed several factories on both sides of the road.

Besides the industries, I noticed a lot of mounds on both sides of
_ the road. Several of these are probably archaeological ruins, converted
into graveyards. It seems like we would never be able to unearth the
mysteries buried within.

Iqbal Qaiser and I were talking about different things, politics, history,
theatre, music, etc. The conversation shifted to Nanak and Mardana and
we discussed the story of their interaction with Maula Karar.
‘Tqbal Qaiser, isn’t this story similar to what happens to us a lot of

umes?’ ] asked him.
‘How so” q
Several times in the past few years people have come up to me ah

told me that they would like to travel with me the next time I visited

fom fri ily members
“Temote area. These requests have come from friends, family mem es
and also random acquaintances. Reading the final version in print,

eee

Sig. a ; 444
ingh, Guru Nanak: Founder of Sikhism, page


www.» khbookclub.com.
166 WALKING WITH NANAK

trip seems fascinating but what a lot of people do not realise ic
work that goes into it. °

For example, on my latest trip to Lahore I ended up coverin
than one thousand kilometres, visiting various sites associate
Nanak. One often travels for several hours to a place to just st
for ten minutes and then head back. However, in an article,
hours are edited down to a thousand words or so, therefi
intensity to the story. By reading these final versions, a
associate romanticism with travel.

In my early days as a travel writer, when I did not know any bette:
L would invite all such friends who at one point or the other had shown
some interest. For most of them, who had made such requests at ditines
parties and other social gatherings, travelling on a Sunday, the only
holiday in a week was too much to ask. There were a few who travelled
but they returned disappointed by what they saw.

‘It is nothing like you described,’ is what they have said to me at the
end of the trip and then they inevitably backed out of all subsequen
trips. In the end, it is once again just me and Iqbal Qaiser who are left.

‘You are right,’ said Iqbal Qaiser, when | described it to him.‘Whata
lot of people do not understand is that this kind of work requires passion
and devotion. Easy as it may look, it is not easy when it comes down to
doing it. 1 feel like there is a poem of Nanak that sums up what we are

trying to say:

the han
XQ

g Mor
d With
Op thers
the Severy)
OFe giving ay

As hands or feet besmirched with slime,
Water washes white;

As garments dark with grime

Rinsed with soap are made light;

So when sin soils the soul

Prayer alone shall make it whole

Words do not the saint or sinner make,
Action alone is written in the book of fate,
What we sow that alone we take;

O Nanak, be saved or forever transmigrate.° 1

‘ISingh, trans. Hymns of the Gurus, page 16

-


Www .sikhbon sr
sikh OOK Cub, cop

TWO PAISAS WORTH OF TRUTH

167
“ads without actions have no value.’
Jo

q think that’s what happened with

have sounded fascinating!
mus

Maula Karar
: Travelling with Sufis al
exploring new culty - ine religions, but when it came to actually doi

jt became difficult for him to do so, he added. y doing

As we reached closer to the city, I noticed that several agricul
selds were flooded, this being the start of the Monsoon season, Ho
shis was NOt the case in Lahore. ] explained my
Qaiset.

‘Tt is because India releases water from its dams when it crosses a
certain limit,’ he said.

This is a continuous bone of contention between the two countries.
During every monsoon, the Indian government releases its extra water,
which causes a flood in the border regions of Pakistan. Sialkot is located
right on the border. In fact, this is no ordinary border. Here, Pakistan
is connected to Jammu and Kashmir, the disputed area and the eternal
source of animosity between these two countries. Historically, Sialkot
provided Punjab with a connection to Kashmir.

‘This also means that historically, the people of this region have
been closer to the people now living on the other side of the border, as
compared to central Punjab?’ I asked Iqbal Qaiser.

‘Yes.’

It was then that I started noticing how the facial features of the
people here are different from that of people living in Lahore and other
regions of Central Punjab. Here, the complexions are fairer and the noses
sharper, something of a connection with the mountainous people living
on the other side of the border, that Partition could not erase. h

Living in the border region, these people are also auvrays under on
shadow of a threat. Only a few days after my visit to this region ners
on the LOC (Line of Control) rose and firing began an nde fl
Itwas reported by Pakistani media that shells from the Indian st
on many villages in the Sialkot district. aint)? asked Iqbal

Where is Baba Bair (the shrine of the iil 7 standing on the

ser of a policeman in a white traffic police va fs ant of him. He was
Cdge of the road, as a major traffic jam snarled in iro

as well, Earlier, it
| over the country,

tural
wever,
observation to Iqbal


www. Khbooke’'y>

168 WALKING WITH NANAK

issue once he was done eating hi
B LR

perhaps planning to resolve the . ) a
(corn). He pointed right, away from the ancient city of Sialleot oes bal
on top of a mound on our left hand side. , ,

‘Do you know, one can see the mountains of Jammu on g ¢
from the roof tops of the city, said Iqbal Qaiser. This little piece
ammu was forbidden fruit for us,

hed

ear day
Of triyi,
excited me, as J

Closer to the shrine, an old man sitting on a chair directed ug towani

the shrine. Driving through the narrow streets of this mohalfy (locality)
which is now known as the mohalla of Baba Bair, we reached the entrance

‘Everybody seemed to know where Baba Bair is but do they also know
that it is called Baba Bair because of Guru Nanak?’ noted in my diary,
sitting in the car, after I parked it in front of a small shop. The vendo,
across from us peered from behind his counter and continued observing
us in a passive manner till we entered the gurdwara.

There was a board at the entrance of the building which noted tha
the gurdwara was renovated in 2012 by the Augaf Department. Inside,
the story of the renovation was a little different. New tiles that were
meant to be used for the building were placed on one side, rotting away
A few renovations had been done, the floor had recently been completed
and the building refurbished, but the gurdwara was far from ready to
become functional. |

‘The government of Pakistan has only recently realised the potential
of the revenue they can earn through Sikh pilgrimage. It is because at
this that they now welcome the funds of foreign investors to renovil
the gurdwara and start the worship anew. Initially, they were reluctant
to allow the renovation even if the money was coming from somewher
else. Now they have gotten over their paranoia,’ said Iqbal Qaiset.

Before coming to this gurdwara, we had been told that the snl
of the gurdwara had been completed and that it was now mei ie
by a few Sikhs living in Nankana Sahib. However, it was clear tha
situation was quite different. hich

The gurdwara was an open structure. There was a veranda W
supported by pillars holding the roof up. There was only one -
in the centre of the building where the Guru Granth Sahib we ot
The berry tree was behind the building. A number of men wet

on

om here

ent


Wire citi:
“w-sikhbookclup, com

TWO PAISAS WORTH OF TRUTH
169
»mises, looki vsti ee

vith in senna that was . uspiciously. There was one group
sting C47 * preparing dhang (cannabis); another
7 in another corner Was smoking dope. Under the berry tree wh i
- Nanak and Mardana sat, a few men were busy playing cards, most
sobably gambling, but no money was visible as gambling is illegal in
pakistan. | |

The berry tree was a thick tree, bending towards the ground. It looked
~ gncient, if judged by its size. There was a long grave under it, which was
covered with a red sheet with Quranic verses on it.

‘This grave is new, said Iqbal Qaiser. I touched the bark of the tree
inan attempt to travel through time and relive the moment when Nanak
had been here. With my hand on the tree, I noticed a red flag at the
entrance that I had missed earlier. It was at this moment that the story of
she tree, the grave and Nanak all converged in my mind, like an epiphany.

A young man of about thirty years, with unkempt hair and an
untrimmed beard, started shadowing us. He started telling us about
the building and that it was a gurdwara which was abandoned in 1947.
He was perhaps hoping for a tip. Pointing at the pictures of Hindu
deities, he said that they were frescoes. On the tiles on the ground there
were names of Sikh devotees who had contributed towards the initial
construction of this gurdwara. My self-appointed guide did not fail to

mention this point.
Realising that this man was here to stay, I asked him about the
- occupant of the grave, even though I had figured out what the story was.
“That is the grave of Pir Bairi (the saint of berries),’ he said.
‘How old is this saint?’ I asked him.
‘Very old. Do you know that Guru Nanak also c
stayed with him? Guru Nanak realised that Pir Bairi

This is an apocryphal story. I have seen quite a
the country to know how to tell a real story from a fabricated one. There
tee one of two possibilities in the case are ion of
rT Is tree was already considered sacred in the } socthinnd

tegion when Nanak came here. Besides berry, kikar, waan, Jand
Poder at ire

revered in the Islamic folk religion. The secone *

ame to this saint and
was 2 powerful saint.
few shrines around



ecw. .cnbookclub.com:

170 WALKING WITH MANAK
story could be that this place became sacred after Gury Nanak’
As has been seen earlier in the book, Guru Nanak is stiff revarde

a holy figure in this part of South Asia, particularly by those Muss, 43
who belonged to areas where Nanak visited, wis

After Partition, even though the gurdwara was abandoned, the pha
and particularly the tree, remained sacred because of its associatig, sia
Guru Nanak. Over the years the association weakened but hy. to
continued to remain sacred. Eventually, that subconscious bong me
broken when the grave of this non-existent saint was constructed
Iqbal Qaiser told me that the last time he came here for his book, thes,
was no such grave.

Perhaps in reality, the truth lies somewhere in the middle of thes.
two stories. It is possible that the tree was sacred before Nanak came
here and continued to remain sacred with Nanak becoming one of the
reasons why it was sacred. Iqbal Qaiser too agreed with my analysis,
Now this gurdwara has become a shrine to Baba Bair with the red flag
at the entrance as his symbol. :

On one of the walls of the building I noticed graffiti that read
‘Ya Allah’ and ‘Ya Muhammad’. It is clear that the building had been
Islamised. Then I noticed that some of the Gurmukhi text on the building
had been wiped clean and instead these two slogans had been scribbled
with a piece of coal.

The devotees of this shrine had a strange relationship with this
building. On one hand they were subconsciously carrying forward the
tradition of Guru Nanak, giving it a contemporary interpretation because
of changing political conditions; on the other hand, they were determined
to completely erase the legacy of this place.

ss

Not far from this shrine was the house of Maula Karar. After Nanak
visit to this place, it was converted into a gurdwara. It is no longe* a
gurdwara but an institute for the blind. It was shut as it was a Sunday
I could not help but notice that there was a newly built mosque next (©
the shrine.

a
¥ Figg

there

anion GTN

ce hnnte ntN NO CEDAR I:


‘Sow. siithbookclub.com |

rWO PAISAS WORTH OF TRUTH
171
de walked into the deserted school, expecting to b
y sooner OF later. In the main hall, I glanced ¢ stopped by
gard s into a ro
af <n aie . ; om where
we gua 4 was sleeping on a charpoy, snoring loudly, The building of
he ol was not part of the original gurdwara. Th building of
the * iste HEX he build; a. The shrine was an
‘nandoned structure next to the building. Tall grass grew around it
jpandons 4 hice f it.
gba! Qaiser busied himself photographing the structure from one side
whereas | attempted to enter the shrine. Just as I was about to step into
spe building. @ dog from within gave out a warning bark. I ran out, content
. . ~ : d
Pp simply imagine the state of the structure.
Our trip to this gurdwara was short. We walked out of it, heading
wards our next destination, which was not far from here: the shrine

of Hamza Ghous.

98

When Nanak was visiting the city of Sialkot, the city was gripped by fear. A
Muslim Sufi by the name of Hamza Ghous had threatened to destroy the entire
city. He was sitting ina building not ‘far from where Nanak was sitting and

was preparing for the destruction. He was a powerful Sufi and could invite the

wrath of Gad over this city if he so wished. Before locking himself in the room,

he had told the people of Sialkot that he would pray for forty days without a
break and at the end of that time the city would be destroyed and only then

would Hamza Ghous emerge from the building.

When Nanak settled under the berry tree, people realised that another
rhaps save them from

man of God had come to their city, one who could pe !
the powerful Hamza Ghous. They approached him and told him about their
Situation,

The problems between Hamza Ghous and Sialkot began when a Hindu

Man from the city approached Hamza Ghous and asked him to bestow him
witb a son, The saint told him that he would have several sons but on condition
~ he would give his first born son to Hamza Ghous. In desperation, the
Hindu man offered him his first-born son hut when the son Was born he refused

thf . ‘ . aoe
Sufi bis promise and offered him money instead. However, Hamza Gho “
han a son and concluded that everyone

; tle for anything fess ¢ ws ae?
“Ving j _° “lS , od reasoning wit b
"fin the city was a liar and a cheat. Several peop de triee 8


Www. khbookclub.com
“Saigon ae |

172 WALKING WITH NANAK

him but in vain. Hamza Ghous decided that the punishment ‘for such ae
city would he destruction at his hands. ‘nfl

On hearing the petition of the city dwellers, Nanak visited the abod
Hamza Ghous and knocked on the door but the Sufi refused to open ig Noy 4
continued doing this for several days in an attempt to dissuade him but t, ”
was no progress. In the meantime, rain started to pelt down hard on th ty
For two days, rainwater flooded the streets of Sialkot and everyone ster

believing that the curse of the saint was coming true.

During the rain, thunder struck the dome of the building in which Hamzy
Ghous was meditating. In desperation and fear he emerged from his room and
finally gave up his mediation and hence the curse to destroy the city. He s =
Nanak and realised that this was the way of God to humble him and teach hin
that there was a Sufi in the city who was even more powerful than he was, In

this way, Baba Guru Nanak saved the people of Sialkot from annibilation,

98

Looking at the shrine of Hamza Ghous, where he is believed to have
meditated for the destruction of the city and was later interned, I could
see what could have given birth to the legend. The architecture of the
shrine clearly demonstrated pre-Mughal features, with a large oval shaped
dome, as opposed to the round dome that became fashionable during
the time of the Mughals. There was a hole on top of this dome from
where the legend of thunder striking the building probably developed.

By focusing on the architecture of the shrine, I had no doubt
that Nanak and Hamza Ghous could not have been contemporaries.
His building looked older than regular fifteenth or sixteenth century
structures, which is when he needed to have been alive if he had ever
met Nanak. The architecture of the shrine resembled the structures of
buildings that were constructed during the Delhi Sultanate period. The
shape of the dome was of key significance here, with its long shape, a8
opposed to round, which became fashionable after the Mughals came
to India. The hole on top of a shrine was also not something that was
particular to this shrine. In older shrines, this was a technique adopte
to facilitate the return of the soul to God.



wwww.sikhbookclub.com

TWO PAISAS WORTH OF TRUTH
173
e shrine avers Ghous was located in a
« berry tree under which Nanak 5
vt these two places, but at the time that Nees teet houses
ould have been in plain sight from where he was seein: » the building

While driving to Sialkot, I had been under the im oo h
this Was 2 completely abandoned structure. Just outside the graveyard
there was a small shop. While looking for this building, Iqbal Oaiser
had gotten out of the car and asked a shopkeeper where the shrine of
Hamza Ghous was. Even though his shop was right at the entrance of
the graveyard, he had no idea who Hamza Ghous was.

Historical books and online records are also quiet about the identity
afthe man buried here. The only references are found in Sikh records,
‘a which this Muslim figure is depicted as the antagonist of the story
fom which Nanak emerges as the hero. ,

‘Why is this?’ I asked Iqbal Qaiser, while we were standing in front
of his shrine. There was one door by which we could enter but it was
locked. The building was in a dilapidated state with several cracks on its
side, Perhaps the lock had been placed there by the Augaf Department
to protect people from falling victim to this feeble structure.

Icould not understand why, over the years, several such stories had
been associated with Nanak, where he humbled Muslim and Hindu
ascetics. I put my question to Iqbal Qaiser.

“That is to show that our saint is more powerful than yours, replied
Igbal Qaiser. Nanak, in my opinion didn’t need such pointless stories
to establish his credibility as a great personality. His genius lies in the

poetic use of words and not in miracles.

icf

About thirty kilometres from Sialkot lay the city
anak’s footsteps, this was our next destination. My compa Tis had

“ser, was exhausted by now and wanted to return to Lahore. en
“na long trip but I was eager to visit as many places rele a
anak as I could in the little span of time that I managed to extr

Ytull time job as a teacher.

n old graveyard not far

of Pasrur. Following
nion, Iqbal


khbookclub.com

country. But this book is not met Ly a St
about gurdwaras, it is also a re-telling of the
story of Nanak the son, the poet, the wanderer,
the father, the friend. Sifting through the
stories of his miracles and poetry, we emerge

with a picture of Nanak, the man.

Also exploring the histories of all the
subsequent Gurus after Nanak, the book
traces the story of how an unorganized
spiritual movement evolved into the
institutionalized Khalsa of Guru Gobind
Singh. Through the journeys of all the
Gurus, the book describes how Nanak

the poet became Guru Nanak the saint.



Ay ye 6 200kKClUub. corny

2 WALKING WITH NANAK

who had been reduced to penury after his son had betrayed him jn,
business.

Chanting ‘Hare Ram, Hare Kri shna’,a group of jogis’ were descending
while Tripta was struggling upwards. She had taken off her shoes at the
base of the stairs to make her journey more difficult and hence more
spiritually rewarding.

Even though it was still the month of Chet (March~April), the sun
was particularly strong in the afternoons. Tiny blisters had developed
under her teet after coming into contact with the burning surface of
the black stone. Her pain increased with every single step. Hare Ram,
Hare Krishna’, she chanted and joined the chorus, trying to divert her
thoughts away from the pain in her feet.

The leader of the jogis was a lean man with long grey locks running
down to his waist. His beard too was thick and untamed. His torso was
covered in a saffron cloth. In one hand he carried a short wooden stick
which he used to support his hand during meditation, while in the other
he carried a small golden flask. His followers’ bodies were smeared with

ash. They wore only saffron loin cloths.

The strong smell of burning cannabis reached Tripta before the jogis
did. From the rear of the group, an ash smeared jogi placed a mud pipe on
the lips of the leader. Tripta bowed reverentially as he passed by, a gesture
that was acknowledged and the supplicant blessed in reciprocation.

‘May all your wishes come true. Your spirit tells me that you are a truc
devotee of Vishnu; Vishnu who is the preserver of this world and beyond.
Remember that the world is balanced by evil and good, pain and ecstasy,
deprivation and bounty. Know that whatever has been taken from you
was needed to maintain the divine equilibrium and whatever will be
given to you will be by Him to fill a void. Bo/o Hare Ram, Hare Krishna.

Thoughts that Tripta had repressed for a long time began to resurface.
Maybe she was not meant to be a mother. Her friends, married around

‘Jogis are religious ascetics who travel in groups and rely upon the generosity
of devotees for food. They hold unorthodox religious views and do not always
observe the strict divisions between religious groups. Historically, their adheren®
have come from both Hindu and Muslim backgrounds.


BI ia Salk nl

_www..:«hbookclub.com,

174 WALKING WITH NANAK
‘There is nothing left there, said Iqbal Qaiser, half-heartedly kn
full well that I wasn’t going there for the building itself but rat

trace the spirit of Nanak.
‘Even if the structure has been demolished, I would sti

visit it,’ I insisted. Iqbal Qaiser agreed politely and we headed
our next destination.

The road that connected Sialkot to Pasrur was perhaps one of
worst roads that I have ever travelled on. It was a short distance but ~
the pitiable state of the infrastructure, it took us well over an he, mn
reach. There were potholes as large as mini-craters. It was a single i
road shared by all sorts of vehicles and animals. ‘

The legend of Pasrur is similar to that of Sialkot; Guru Nanak
humbles an arrogant Muslim Sufi by the name of Mian Mitha, Op
hearing that Nanak had arrived in his city after defeating the powerful
Hamza Ghous, he goes to challenge him and has a discourse with him,
This discourse is recorded in the Guru Granth Sahib.

98

On hearing that Nanak had come to Pasrur, Mian Mitha was consumed by
jealousy. The story of the humbling of Hamza Ghous had already spread and
Mian Mitha was not pleased that a Muslim Saint had been humbled at the
hands of an unbeliever. T will churn him and take the cream out of the milk
within him,’ he said to his followers. He then sent one of them to the garden
where Nanak was staying and asked him to convey the message to him.

‘Tell him that if he comes to me to show off his powers I will squeeze all the
juice out of him, as one squeezes a lemon,’ said Nanak to Mian Mitha’s devotee.

The messenger returned and conveyed Nanak’ sentiments to his Master
Hearing this remark, Mian Mitha understood the sagacity of the non-M uslim
Saint and set off to meet him without any shoes, a sign of extreme respect. His
devotees were flabbergasted by Mian Mitha’s sudden change of behaviour and
asked why he now wanted to meet the man whom he had earlier wanted!
churn.

‘If I take the cream out of the milk, there will still be some milk left
if he squeezes me like a lemon, what will be left in me? On second thoughts
I better not take the risk of such a dangerous confrontation.

OWing
her to

Want to
toward


Ww

ww.sikhbookclub,com
tad

TWO PAISAS WORTH OF TRUTY
175
oem though Mian Mitha had been humbled, there dipirs
4, He was followed by his devotees, who respected bie ie left
varances, 80 be decided to challenge Nanak on the doch ne
Mian M itha knew that if he asked Nanak questions about i
P jeing 4 non-Muslim, he would be ata loss for words and thus Mia
yitha would be succes ul in keeping face. However, Nanak was well versed
in Islamic injunctions and when Mian Mitha asked him questions about the
ature of hell and heaven and the punishments that are reserved for bit
ers by God, Nanak answered him in Islamic iconography. Nanak said:

had to keep
of religion.
lamic belief;,

peltet

As sesame 15 heated and pressed,

or cotton carded by means of a thong,

«a shall sinners be punished.

Like paper they shall be beaten with mallets,

and put into presses;

They shall be heated like iron;

they shall burn and cry aloud;

The wretched beings’ heads shall be taken up with tongs and placed on
anvils

Nanak, he who meets not the true Guru and obtains not divine knowledge,
shall find no rest in this world or the next.>?

During the discourse, Nanak impressed Mian Mitha with his knowledge
about Islam. In fact, so well versed was Nanak that even Mian Mithas
knowledge was found to be wanting in front of him. As Nanak spoke, Mian
Mitha touched Nanak’s feet, kissed them and became his devotee. Towards the
end of the discourse, Nanak uttered the following words:

The present are favoured; the absent are not.
Faith is a friend, want of faith an infidel;
Pride is ruin, wrath is unlawful;
Concupiscence is Satan, conceit is infidelity;

“Gur Nanak, translation by Max Arthur MacAlife, Te Sith Retin
ns Sacred Writings and Authors, Internet archive, 1900 ae a a Org,
“tatv/thesikhreligion01macauoft/thesikhreligionOLmacavo t_Ojvul.


v6 WALEING WITH NANAK

The slanderer’s face is black

The man without faite is un dean; he who is tender. hearts din aoe
Knowledge is gentleness, The non~avaricious are holy, the gx Pare, ea
impatient. dold Ves gp,
The honest man has a bright, the ungrateful man, a yellows fay ay

98

It was a Sunday evening and the garden where Nanak and Mian Mite ;
had their religious discourse was full of young boys and girls pla.
different games. The structure which commemorated the in
Nanak and Mian Mitha interacted was on one side. se
Iqbal Qaiser was right. Hardly anything of the original gurdwar,
been preserved. There was just the floor and towards pe
Near this ruined structure was a jamun (a purple berry) tree, Thee
‘was a group of young girls standing at its base cheering the brave gid



: TWO) PAISAS WORTH OF TRUTH ny

, age the sacred pool attached to this gurdwara,’ ki

1 walked cowards therm aa a pilgrim ready to wash oe
gt our short trip to this gurdwara, as we headed back to the car,
‘ ae wards sever al trees that were spread throughout the garden,
7 pa hort trees yet stout and beautiful, I could not tell what their
| Dee eas. “These are very old trees,’ said lqbal Qgiser casually. “They

ge ocd in the book called Tarith Guru Kosa writen by Bba
| | Singh. This man belonged to Sialkot and the book was written
| Lake in the nineteenth century. This used to be a beautiful garden,’



www.» khbookclub.com,

12
AN UNMARKED GRAVE

I stood at the edge of the mound. It was about twenty metres deep,
The city ended here. In front of me was the Gurdwara of Guru Nanak,

Chota Nankana. There was a pool of dirty water

famously known as
fort of Deepalpur.

next to it. This had once been the moat around the
Buffaloes were swimming in the dirty pool, as the herdsman, a young boy
of eighteen, lay on the ground next to it, singing songs. I walked along
the edge and saw below me the ancient gateway into the city that once
used to be shut at night, but now was just like any other thoroughfare.

Iqbal Qaiser returned after a little while and told me that the young
boy Usman could not allow us to see the temple from inside as womenfolk
were around. This was the temple of Deepal, the ancient Hindu temple
of this city after whose namesake the city was named.

According to the legend, Deepal was a Hindu sadhu who had
acquired spiritual power because of his devotion to God. His head was
completely shaved with only a lock of hair remaining on the back, typic#!

of Hindu Brahmins. One day when he was at home, the same building in

which Usman and his migrant family from Hissar now lived, he teas¢
ed in the

his mother. In frustration his mother cursed him to get buti
ground, a diatribe meant to be semi-humorous. However, Deepal t0°
the curse to heart and decided to bury himself in the ground. His mother
only realised what was happening when Deepal’s entire body had beer
buried and only that one lock of hair was left aboveground. She rushe


wat: sikhbookclub,com
‘Wetrweienn | ene |

AN UNMARKED GRAVE

Id it. The body st m
ward " me 0 ered to sto Y Stopped Sinking further,
jt ja shrine stone while the house of De

aif "

OF nal who was following Iqbal Qaiser, came and sto ;
asa magnificent building, a broad double storey house dec ous.
ith gaditional patterns of wood and brick work. It was spneten
stat though and one could imagine how splendid it must have looked
hen this was a sacred place. Op ee

Facing the temple was another double-storeyed building, muct
bi r than the temple. These were the residential quarters ail by
devotees of the temple for pilgrims who gathered here throughout the
vear and specifically for the annual festival of the temple, which was a
big fair. On top of this residential building, the names of devotees who
bad provided money for the construction of the buildings were inscribed
. Devanagari script. There was a vacant lot between these buildings
where the festival used to be organised. On one side of the plot was an
sbandoned well. A few houses had been built in the surrounding spaces
by newcomers. Their architecture stood in sharp contrast to the intricate
chitectural patterns of the temple and the accompanying caravanserai.

Kindly forgive me,’ said Usman. ‘I would have happily shown you
the temple but J cannot today as our womenfolk are inside.’

‘That's alright,’ said Iqbal Qaiser. ‘Son, I came here a few years ago
and photographed the temple. I believe it was your father that I met. At
that time I saw an object inside the temple that was covered with a silver
sensil.It was like a lock of hair but made out of stone.’ |

‘Yes. It is still there. It is in our living room. We cover it with a utensil

‘that it doesn’t get destroyed. Sometimes Hindus and Sikhs come to

* from India and we show them the lock. They offer their prayers In

“ont of it. Some even bow down to it.

We walked the narrow streets of this ancient city, which was —
man important route connecting the cities of Delhi and Multan. :
"« thirteenth century, during the Delhi Sultanate, for a briet pens
~"“palpur also served as the capital of Punjab. Looking at out ee rie
ins Notebooks, a middle-aged man called Arshad, along with oi ri
"tn, decided to accompany us.‘I too am from the media, he said.

Eventually,
epal became a

415 Ww


Www,- ishbookclub.com,
netted

180 WALKING WITH NANAK

based in Dubai and have come to visit Pakistan on vacation, | , ~
there which I rent to people working for the Geo and ARY é.
(two prominent Pakistani news channels).’ ‘anne,

We exited from the southern gate of the city and headed tor,
Chota Nanakana. Arshad knocked on the door and a child step is
‘These are my guests from Lahore and they want to see the ia Out,
from inside. They will just take a few photos and leave.’ ewara

‘Who is it? asked a voice from within the house. It was that of
old woman, sounding irritated. on ani

‘Ammaji, 1am Arshad. | live in the market area. I have a few friend.
over from Lahore who want to photograph the gurdwara from sid
Please allow them to do it.’ “

‘What will they get out of photographing this place? It is destroyed
now. Come in, anyway.’

We walked into the courtyard. There was a charpoy in the centre. o7
which the old woman who spoke to us was sitting. She must have been
in her early seventies. Her hair was dyed red with henna and there wa;
a black paranda”* in her hair. There were two other young girls in the
house whom I guessed to be her daughters-in-law because of the strict
manner in which the old woman was speaking to them.

The gurdwara was in front of us. It was a white structure and the
borders were decorated with blue patterns. Within those blue patterns,
animals and floral patterns were painted in white. It was a double storied
building.

The rooms on the ground floor had been converted into residential
rooms while those on the upper floor had been razed, leaving only the
facade. There were small arches and piers decorating the face of the
building. Nothing of the original shrine remained on the inside.

‘When I moved here, the gurdwara was in much better condition,

she said. She too happened to be from Hissar and had moved into the
shrine along with her family after Partition. ‘I remember there used 0
be a mud grave behind the building. In the earlier days, we used to take
care of the grave. We would clean it and put a cloth over it. My fathet
planted a tree next to it but over time the grave has vanished.’

**A decorative braid, tied to the Hids? by South Asian women

ee ee eer od


| while the sun completely set and darkness ¢

181
giser and I returned from the isanno:
hal Qaiser an , gurdwara disappointed at its
* condition. ‘If they were taking care of the grave, they could have
a fooked after the gurdwara,’ said Iqbal Qaise
a]

r,
‘You know how Pakistani religiosity works, There has to be a Muslim

d. Whose grave Was it by the way?’

98

4 small lantern shone at the top of the buildin

g.A few men and women
«rambled around it, perhaps in search of som

ething. And then in alittle
pread its cloak. The light of

the lantern shone brighter as the sounds.of a bhajan emerged from the

‘Master, let's go and take part in their bhajan,’
to Nanak. ‘l am sure they will have langar for us,’

‘You have now been travelling with me for years and yet you are
not familiar with my ways. You know that I would never go into to the
dty.] don't have anything against that temple. If it was located in some

suggested Mardana

: wildemess, we could have spent the night there but not when itis located

the edge of such a big city,’ replied Nanak.
: Diecast sean rutnmecee ti
the city had now been

closed for the night and Mardana was sure that



www dxhbookclub.com,

182 WALKING WITH NANAR

y, the birds go by, Nanak thoughe of lis
8 I

his mother and his sister, Now that they were heading hone altey
journey ta the Kast and South, this longing, seemed to increaye
Often, when Nanak and Mardana were alone, Nanak talked

alk all over the world, Nanak would say that he

every evening, watchin |
Oh

the),

. 4 abo
his mission to W
to shatter the boundarie:
narrate the poetry of Bhag in
things. Often in the night when Mardana pretended to be asleep, Nana
would talk to the imaginary Bhagat Kabir and Farid. He would call the
by their first names. He would tell them about his frustrations with ri
world. Then he would recite to them their own poetry
sometimes offering his own explanations. ver since they had entered
Punjab, the frequency of Nanak’s imaginary conversations had increased
It was on nights like these that Mardana would worry about his
friend. He would jump to the conclusion that Nanak was behaving the
y he was because of exhaustion and homesickness. They had been

. _ ee Withite
praised by religious divisions. He woul .

lof
, s ‘ ’ . le
at Kabir and Baba Farid which talked of '

idiocy of the

wa
away from home for thirteen years now.

Tonight, Nanak pressed on with no signs of stopping. It was as if he
was searching for something. Mardana wanted to ask him but he had
become accustomed to his friend’s moods by now and knew better than
to interrupt. Nanak would stop immediately if Mardana expressed the
slightest sign of discomfort but then he would spend the entire night
in agony, as if something important had been taken away from him.
Therefore, Mardana wanted Nanak to stop of his own accord.

Following an abandoned trail in the jungle, covered in undergrowth,
which indicated that it wasn't used much, Nanak and Mardana found
themselves in front of a wooden hut. There was no sign of activity ther
Nanak and Mardana stood at the entrance for a little while. Deciding
that it was empty, Mardana was about to barge in when Nanak stopped
him. ‘What if someone is sleeping inside? We should be polite enoug
to knock first, just in case.’

They knocked twice but there was no reply. On the third knock if
: door opened and a shadow peeked out from the darkness. They °
ge. not sec anything but the yellow eyes that stared back at them.
oe ‘You must be a hermit, living so far away from the city, aske

Nanak



Ww. sikh lub.com,

AN UNMARKED GRAVE

183
faster. you are misinformed, ‘said the shadow in a shaky voice.”
| sudden flutter of the eyes as if Nanak’s question he ites there
ame is Nuri and am a leper. I am not liy; x shaken him,
afy 94 Poh te a, ing here out of choice
mT eet chased out of the city. My own sons have dbando, dice. |
qve pe lene andoned me, This
Maple house that you see, is one I have constructed : oa
hum ; he extremes of the we: a myself. It Provides
ae shelter from t cs of the weather. This is the only place it
ne world where no one despises me.’ ;
t Nuri then opened the door and Nanak and Mardana were able to s
his crippled body. There v= hardly any skin on him, just bones, His wyes
emed to pop out of their sockets and he could barely stand on his feet
~ Mardana’s initial reaction was to move away from the haunting
ggure. He took a step back but Nanak took a step forward and holding
Nuri, helped him sit on the ground. Nuri was so surprised by the action
of this stranger at his door that he allowed his body to respond to his
tindness. Mardana feared that Nanak would also contract leprosy now,
but remained quiet.

Nanak and Mardana stayed with Nuri the leper for two days. Every
day, Nanak would wake up early and prepare breakfast for the three of
them and serve them. He would then complete other chores around
the house, which would usually be collecting wood from the jungle and
cooking. In the evening, after having their supper they would sing dirtan
(devotional songs).

Nuri was so surprised by the acts of kindness by this stranger, when
his own kin had abandoned him that he would cry all day while Nanak
served him. Often, he would want to express his gratitude to Nanak
but every time he tried, tears welled up in his eyes and he would end
\p crying more. After two days, Nanak and Mardana left Nuri in his
hut and headed for Pakpattan to meet his friend Sheikh Ibrahim. After
Nanaks departure, Nuri would sing the poems of Nanak in remembrance
of his friend. After his death a few years later, he was buried in his hut

oy his sons,

wa


www.sikhbookclub.com,

THE PROPHECY

the same time as her had been blessed with several children, but she was
still childless. A fire burned within her that could only be quenched by
the love of her own child. She longed to see tiny feet running around in
the mud of the courtyard. She would often imagine what it would feel
like to have a baby. In the winters she would knit woollen sweaters and
caps for the baby. Walking towards the family well, she would imagine a
little baby walking alongside, gripping the edge of her Aameez. At night
she would sing lullabies, while during the day, in front of her family, she
would pretend that nothing was wrong.

She felt worse for her husband, Mehta Kalu, who she knew was
distressed, even though he never said anything. Of late, the couple had
grown distant and Tripta blamed her barrenness for it. A couple of times
when she had suggested to her husband that he should marry another
woman to bear him a child, he had ridiculed the suggestion. She was
touched that the thought of another woman repulsed him, but the sight
of her husband’s sad eyes tore at her heart.

In these desperate times, she paid heed to all sorts of suggestions. She
would present herself to any sadhu or fakir who would stop temporarily
‘n the forest around Rai Bhoi di Talwindi. Every morning, at sunrise
she would visit the Laxmi temple and present offerings of a coconut,
sweetmeats and flowers to the pandit. When someone suggested to her
that she should also offer a chadar (sheet) at the shrine of Ali Hajveri in
Lahore, she did so. On another occasion, she accompanied her husband
to Tilla Jogian, the most important pilgrimage site for jogis in the Punjab.
There the couple paid for the jogis’ food for one day, as a result of which
the jogis prayed all night to bless this young couple. On the way back
they stopped at Katas Raj, where both of them took a dip in the holy
pond, considered to have been filled up by a tear drop of Lord Shiva.

When one of her neighbours, a Brahmin woman, suggested that
the couple should visit an ancient Hindu temple located at the top of a

mound three fos (about eleven kilometres) from their city, Mehta Kalu
turned down the advice. He had been to too many temples and shrines
to continue believing in miracles. In fact, he had accepted his fate and
given up hope of having a child. In order to fill the void, he had started
spending more time at work, maintaining meticulously the accounts of


13
GURU HAR RAI

After his defeat at the hands of his brother Aurangzeb, Dara Shikoh
decided to head west to Lahore and continue his fight against his younger
brother from there. However, by this time, the tide of the war had turned
against the eldest prince and it seemed like he was mentally prepared for
an impending defeat. At this moment it is assumed that he was giving
his followers and allies false hope and perhaps planning to flee before

his brother captured him.
It was in this condition that Dara Shikoh stopped over at Goindwal,

where the fort of Guru Har Rai had been constructed only a few years
ago. The fort had a spacious stable, a tank and residences for his warriors.
Following the tradition of his grandfather Hargobind, Har Rai too kept
horses and a force of twenty-two hundred fighters. The Guru was escorted
by an armed guard wherever he travelled.

Dara Shikoh and Guru Har Rai had become friends much belo
the internecine war broke out between the Mughal princes.
Emperor Shahjahan was still secure on the Mughal throne, his eldest ef
and crown prince, Dara Shikoh, fell seriously ill and no doctor was zs
to cure him. Hearing about the news of the prince, Guru Har Rat® ait
him some medicine that cured him. Both the Emperor and the a r
acknowledged the wisdom of the Guru, even though the Erp 4
earlier been directly in conflict with the former Guru, Guru Hare”

? . . “ d some
After this event Dara Shikoh regularly visited Guru Har Rai a



www.sikhbookclub.com,

GURU HAR Ral

Jaim th: | 185
igh sources claim that he became a devote

be was fifteen years older than him. For the Guru, even though
Mn his pitiable situation, the prince relied on his fri
jim for blessings as well as military support a oat
onl gid Guru Har Rai bless Dara Shikoh but he
shat once he reached Lahore, Har Rai too would ell ° Promised him
Jongside the prince. At this point there are several a him and fight
One version says that the day after Dara Shikoh hese of the story,
forces of Aurangzeb reached via the Beas, a place near whe anote, the
yas staying. Using his forces the Guru prevented Autaneveb. Guru
gom disembarking. This version is rubbished by other it i s amy
state that Aurangzeb followed the trail of his brother almost a month
wer he fled to Lahore.» “ee
As promised, the Guru, along with his forces, reached Lahore
1o assist Dara Shikoh. In Lahore, Guru Har Rai observed that the
forces of Dara Shikoh were slackening and Dara himself, aware of his
approaching defeat, had planned to flee to Multan from Lahore, from
where he planned to head further west to Kandahar. Guru Har Rai met
Dara Shikoh in Lahore and then returned to Kartarpur after looking at
the condition of the prince.

When Aurangzeb took over the throne of Delhi and established his
position, he summoned Guru Har Rai to Delhi asking him to explain his
tole during the war between the two princes. Guru Har Rai wrote back
to the Emperor with a petition to be exempted from a visit to Delhi,

saying that he was a religious leader and had nothing to do with the

imperial court. He also said that he would instead be sending his son Ram
ded that

Rai to Delhi who would be his representative there. It is recor ‘
Ram Rai had a detailed conversation with the Emperor Pee had
time discussing the religious philosophy of Sikhism. The ae uel
een under the impression that Sikhism was anti-Islam but g

_All was going
Conversation with Ram Rai this impressio® was en minister, with
well in court according to Sikh tradition when 4 np

end and asked
is brother, Not

Lotus, 2006), page?

ith Pal Singh, The History of Sikh Gurus
N5~196 ; ;

(New Delhi:


qe WALEENG WEPT RANAK
the Intenhen at creahiag 4 COD EFOVETS quoted 4 poet of N
had the potential to be orisinterpretedt by the Experor and Ak Which ;
wrtalamic, The poor was Perel a,

Bae aly of a Minsiins grave

Rei droge tbe Aannds of the pedter

Poss aad deteds cnet af it Ae mrades

Iie the five dnons abe peer city
Ae it drarns 2 weeps ane WATE
Shedding sears of ciredder ae ity fate
Says Namad, Ged and Greater

Wie iy the Canse of all canases

Knows where departs and wat Aefills
The send of man dereafter.®

Ram Rai realized that the poem could potentially offend

ea Muslims believe that the graves of the sell should al eae
a with in any-way, Nanak, in this poem, implies a disfigurement ofthe gre
when he says, “The clay ofa Muslim's grave... Falls into the hands ofthe
ter, from which he makes pots and bricks. This could be viewed asa

: of the grave and hence offensive to Muslims. Ram Rai knew.
in the court of the ‘pious’ Aurangzeb was alte
on, given his father’s links with Dara Shikoh,



Siti cenceait

GURU HAR
At 1
hed the cars of Har Rai through Sikh devo
. peace
on
:
|

| tees in Delhi. Gury
/ gai furned at the actions of his son and disowned him, He also
Har ™

| Ram Rai would
. are
dec
Lommiun ; ; ; . os
exon Rai tried secking forgiveness from his fathe
mn “ , —) ee Ya
7 but Har Rai was in no mood to forgive him for the sacrilegious
¥ j ms a ‘a 4 ‘ .
med ynipulating the Shabd. The Shabd had still not become the
: mnie ¥ % ’ an) ry ‘
ict of | Guru. This was done by Guru Gobind Singh but the significance
" J ‘ * ‘ ‘ .
Be abd or the divine word, was still immense at this time. A month
of nine Ram Rai, Guru Har Rai appointed Harkrishan as the
60
after Gl!

d that any Sikh who associated with

also be
icated from Sikhism.

r through various


www...«hbookclub.com

14
NOT HINDU ENOUGH

Sea water splashed the side of the ship, jumping up into the unguarde;
eyes of the sailor. He had been standing there for several hours trving
to discern in the horizon the temple he had heard about while he was
at Muscat.

This trading vessel originated from Arabia and had stopped at
Muscat on the way, where a few local sailors had told them about this
ancient temple on the coast of a village called Kolachi. They were told
this temple was dedicated to the sea god and it was his desire that all
trading vessels passing from the Arabian Sea offer tribute at this shrine.
As a word of caution it was added that those who failed to pray at this
shrine of Varuna drowned. The captain of this ship (called a dhow) was
a superstitious man and had taken the prophecy a bit too seriously. He
had appointed a young sailor, who was on his maiden journey, to look
out for this temple off the coast of Makran.

The crew was told that as soon as the mountains of Makrin
submerged into the sea, this small shrine would appear on the coast. Its
sign was that there would be several lamps lit at its entrance and that
it was located in a part of the coast where there were lots of cliffs. The
young sailor had been standing on the side of the vessel for hours now
but in vain. Far away in the haze he could see land but no lamps- He was
afraid that he had missed the lamps and had hence invited the w#""
of the captain. Most of the occupants of the dhow were Muslims. Onl



|
NOT HINDU ENOUGH
™ onenaene
, ww.sikhbookclub.com.

atant of the owner and the captain" was"a Je
he gccou ed to look out for the shri wi ideals
pe pee a8 e the shrine was a Coptic Christi
i. ae ian.
wb 48 tory of the sea god was a popular story amongst the sailors of
‘ Arabia, who often travelled across the Arabian Sea. Th .
fuse . iolent s nse
} “that were lost to the violent storms of the monsoon were explained
ye se of
ie Heel drowned by the curse of Varuna. Everybody listened to the
ae with immense interest but no one took them seriously. For the
§ inded Muslims, these were legends of pagans that had nothing
th. It is for this reason that most vessels bypassed the
d travelled furthered to their destinations in eastern

189

tion
owith the tru
Kolachi an

hern India.
£ Varuna outside this village was well known to the local

Hindus of this region, who often visited it but outside of this region it
sas hardly known. The shrine of Somnath in Gujarat further east was
quch more popular and most sailors chose that place to pray for their
safe journey: It is for this reason that Gujarat had developed into an
economically powerful region while Kolachi remained a small village.
To his relief, the sailor saw a few small fshermen’s boats not far from

his ship. The fishermen told the sailors that Varuna’s shrine was not far

fom there and that they would have to travel on the smaller boats to

eet there as their large ship would not be able to manoeuvre around the

rocky port.
The captain and a few senior sailors disembarked and left to see the
oins with him that he

temple of Varuna. The captain carried a few gold c
as going to offer to the sea god for a safe journey, leaving behind the
silor who had laboured for hours to look for the temple.

ics

I .
_ my friend Humayun Memon and
dl disappear into the sea of people.

Ser, ~
ett ° the muezzin was blasting fro
ouring mosque. I was stranded in the parking lot of Park Towers,

th !
a shopping mall of the megapolis of Karachi. Standing next to me
ny friend Sadia Khatri along with a few of her friends.

spast of
nd sout
The shrine o

his colleague Vijesh Ramparshad
It was a Friday and the kAutha
m the loudspeakers of the


yeclub Con
yo sation

WALKIE WITH NANAK
Wa),

the morning, E had gone to Hatnayuns offies Whey
Varlier mee ne ke es ‘if} Vig eh af fj d i
k { 1 photographer and pore if J } fichey tin -
Vit Ol AS + j j ’ . . Vij,
work | with him. Vigesh wae tryin to get us inte thi, Terie Sh
worked W aw at (Life ee,
” rhewwat Muahadey Terngile ; white i Was at ¢ lif ti, the Hitjes “ Betis
atneowat \Via
vart of Karachi, «| aekel Vilesk
i. ‘Do you know how old this teripil 197 Tasker 7 i4¢ oh while WE Weep,
f) a4 Es ; ’
| towards it. After a few minutes of silence he replied, Very oly
Iii IW y é , j
aii and fifty years.” | orniled and tole harry thy.
At least one hundred and fifty lat thy.

tet i le had try he at least five hundred years old hee Aline Gury Nari
CTE ‘ f :

at trie blankly arid
then said, Yes. That is possible, making a quick jump yee

is waid to have visited this shrine. Vijesh looked back

al 4 PHN reg
ANY years |

| lummayay,
had an interest in such travels. She had arrived with two other friends

and looking at the number of visitors, Vijesh was worried th

not be able to yet everyone into the temple. ‘Worse comes
‘ ¥

visit the temple alone,’ I assured him.

Since this was my first visit to the city of Karachi in gp
had also invited another friend, Sadia Khatri, who too like

at he tighy
tO worst, |’

We stood there for quite a long time with no news of | lum
of Vijesh. The guard standing at the entrance of this shopping
looked at us suspiciously. Ina city torn by conflict, security yu
law enforcement authorities are quick to react to

I tried calling | lurnayun but his phone w
he called back and said that the authorities
us to see the temple. I told him that [ w
of the road and would talk to the authorities myself,

Putting my phone in my pocket, well aware of the
in Karachi, | crossed the road and met Hum
took me to the entrance of the temple.
sitting selling sweets and flowers, used
was still inside the temple, which was under the ground. A staircase led
to it. A man emerged from the stairs carrying a few sweets which he

placed carefully on the ground as food for the ants, Quickly, they attacked
the food given to them,

In front of me was am
Sea. This is reclaimed |

ayn
ral]
ards and
any irregular activity,
as busy. After a little while
at the temple would not allow
as Coming over to the other side

street crime rate
ayun on the other side, He
Here, a few Hindu men were
as offerings at the temple. Vijesh

anicured garden, beyond which lay the Arabian
and,’ said Humayun pointing towards the garden.


www. sikhbeokclub.com

NOT HINDU ENOUGH
19}

¢ the sea must have come all the way to the temple, which
“ : WwW 1C

~ poin
a cave, he added. A large part of Clifton is constructed

“At ot f . j
; }yqsnce
cates

- caclaimed land.
Sort) Haroon they will not allow anyone to see the temple,’ said
eh jearl distressed at the rejection. Ie seemed as if it was a personal
jure for hum. Cant 1 talk to the pandit myself?’ I asked.
said that £0 him,’ said Vijesh, ‘but he is not willing to come upstairs
gen fF -hat. They are being rather difficult about it.’ —_
ae vad flown down to Karachi after spending several thousand rupees
an girtare and cutting my vacation in half to visit this temple in Clifton,
conch had once been a famous temple dedicated to the sea god, and here I
was standi hreshold, unable to go inside. I was not willing to give
thout trving- | called up my contacts in Lahore, trying to find the
harge of the administration of this temple. After a few phone
mber of Raj Kumar, the only person who could give
me permission to visit the temple. He was in charge of administration
atthe temple. I was confident that once I got to talk to him I would be
able to convince him to allow me to see the temple for a few minutes.
‘The person you are trying to contact is currently unavailable,’ said the
computer-recorded voice of a woman on the other side of the phone.
‘Sorry, Haroon, said Vijesh. ‘I feel so bad I cannot help you. You know
Lasked the pandit and he said that Guru Nanak had never visited this
temple. This is a purely Hindu temple dedicated to the worship of Shiva.’
Despite what the pandit was saying, I was sure that this was the
temple that Guru Nanak visited in Karachi. In Iqbal Qaiser’s Historical
le at Clifton was identified as the

Sikh Shrines of Pakistan, this temp
temple which Nanak had visited on his tour of Sindh. Iqbal Qaiser was
2s credible a source on Guru Nanak and Sikhism as it could get, as far

as ] was concerned.
We stood aimlessly at the entrance of the temple, hoping to set
but it was switched

through to Raj Kumar. I tried his phone several times
ple, wearing saris. Before

ie few Hindu women emerged from the tem

‘parting they stood in front of the staircase and offered one last prayer
to the Hindu deities inside. A man who was probably a guard here
‘sked us to move away from the entrance of the temple. We decided to

ngonitst

up wi

person 1n ¢
calls, 1 found the nu



www. xhbook box kclub.com
sy pee inn a menial

3 WALKING WITH NANAK
192

head to our next destunafion and keep trying Raj Kumar; mand
f possible, come back in the evening. €F, an:

9

The temple of Varuna was located within a cave in these clige

- . > ON th,

shore. Water from the sea reached right up to these caves during | the
+ : 7 S high

tide. Stone steps led up to the temple from the sea, while there gh
Wa

another set of stairs for devotees arriving by land.
Within the cave were two rooms. In one of them there were severe
lamps placed on niches between the rocks. The pandit of this temple
urged the captain to do the same. He told him that each of these lan, ;
had been lit for a particular ship that had set sail in the sea, Some
them had been lit by the sailors themselves, while others had been kr
by their loved ones. Taking an unlit lamp, the captain lit a flame for th.
well-being of his own ship and crew. He then placed it in an empty niche
Since this was a pagan shrine, the captain had expected to find an
idol here but there was none. He posed this question to the pandit who
explained that the sea god Varuna resides in the waves and winds of
the ocean. He lives underwater with the fish and occasionally manifests
himself by riding on a giant fish. Several centuries ago, he had meditated
within these caves and harnessed the powers of the ocean. This is not just
a shrine but his actual home. ‘He comes even today, said the pandit to
the captain. ‘But one needs to be a pure-hearted soul to see him.

The pandit told the captain that several holy men came to thi
temple, to meditate in the room where Varuna meditated, in order t0
harness his mystical powers. Out of the millions who had tried doing
this, only a handful had succeeded, the pandit said. “There are holy men
meditating as we speak.’

The captain expressed a desire to see the room where the holy me?
were meditating but the pandit told him that it was impossible to go
there because that might disturb their peace and in their wrath the}
might curse the ship. The captain, however, was determined to see 5°

meditation room and if possible get blessings from the holy me™-
captain who had earlier been so superstitious about his journey ¥*° .

AWN tsar TARE SEINE he

i


NOT HINDU ENOUGH

193

confident, after lighting the lam 3
an! could sink his ship even if a holy ire 0 — now
+o in the pandit’s hand and insisted that he naaeis cme

iS ation room. He assured him that he would do wc eget oe
he pandit and the captain sneaked into the room sicigi is

" weit sitting on the floor, lost in their meditation. Some were rai
we obati yogic positions while others were sitting in comfort. There
in “a fon who were standing with their hands raised vertically, while
were g was resting on the knee of the other leg. This was hardly a quiet
Th roar of the sea splashing against the rocky shore echoed in
ais small hall. None of the occupants noticed the intruder except one.
He was sitting in one of the corners in a saffron chola. He had a long
beard which was greying and there were dark circles under his eyes. He
bad long hair which was covered by a saffron turban.

The old man looked straight at the sailor without expressing any
enotion. The captain felt the stare of the holy man pierce him as if he
was looking at someone beyond him. It seemed as if the holy man was
gill in a daze from his meditation, even though his eyes were open. The
captain attempted to walk out of the room but the old man gestured at

ane le

tie to stop and headed vownnidé himad-:nysprieroumeinas emt
Sitting on top of the cliff the captain and the holy man engagedeach =
- other in conversation. The sea was in front of them, trying desperately
- todimb up the cliff. Not far from there was a Muslim shrine which was

moe


WA ks

My; wh bookclub.com
ee ih

4 WALKING WITH NANAK

the ruler of Talwindi, Rai Bular Bhatti. Worried for Mehta Kalu’s wife,
Rai Bular had suggested to him several times that he should spend more
time at home, keeping his wife company. Despite their friendship, Mehtg
Kalu could not explain to his employer that the sight of an empty and
silent courtyard haunted him,

Tripta wanted to hold on to any sign of hope. For her this would be
a pilgrimage, a holy act even if her wish was not granted. Social mores
dictated that women should remain confined within the boundaries of
their homes. However, religious pilgrimages provided them with the
opportunity to explore a world otherwise closed to them. Despite being
a woman, Tripta liked to travel, observe different religious practices, and
see different cultures.

‘Why won't you take the palanquin?’ argued Mehta Kalu with his
young wife. “The sun, after the first quarter of the day is particularly
harsh this year. You will be uncomfortable on the way.’ This was the
first argument between the couple in a long time. On any other day she
would have complied immediately with what her husband suggested,
even if it went against her wishes, but not today. Cocooned within this
disagreement, however, was love. Her husband’s protectiveness melted her
heart. She wanted to tell him that she would do whatever he wanted if
he would love her like this all his life, but she constructed a wall around
her emotions.

‘Whoever goes to a pilgrimage like a princess?’ she countered. She
was surprised at her audacity. If her mother ever heard her refusing her
husband’s wishes, she would have been disappointed in her daughter.
But pain is an effective teacher. It can mature someone in a short period
of time. Tripta also took advantage of the fact that Mehta Kalu was a
genteel man who listened to and cared for the opinions of others, even
if the other was of the gentler sex. ‘Only if] go as a mendicant will the
goddess be convinced of my devotion,’ said Tripta, putting an end to
the conversation.

Had this been a long journey Mehta would have ensured that
guards travelled with his wife. The jungles of Punjab were infested with
thugs and dacoits who attacked innocent travellers. But since this was
a short journey, he allowed the expedition to go ahead without sentries.


www ,.i.khbookclub.com.
pls BEEN Leclerc

}

WALKING WITH NANAK |

194
'

|

|

. ,
spread his message but to understand the message of different religioy,

and spiritual traditions.
The discourse with Nanak touched a chord within the captain, Hy,

felt that Nanak was a manifestation of all his aspirations. He sa th
for hours talking to Nanak, asking him about his various adventu,.
He also shared stories of his own adventures, for the Captain too ee
widely travelled. s

‘Baba Nanak, how do I become your follower?’ asked the captain
‘What is the religion I should follow to become your devotee? Fo, the
first time during their conversation, Nanak asked the captain what ~
religion was. Nanak had assumed that he was a Muslim but he gtij
wanted to be sure. Nanak was rather surprised when he was told that

the captain was a Jew.
‘You are my follower if you are willing to learn all your life. You have

to remain a student forever like me. Learn from not only scholars and
holy men but also from those whom you chose to ignore—servants,
women, children, animals, plants, the sea, the land and the sky. Keep an
open mind and never become too rigid in your beliefs. Dogma is the
end of inquiry and hence the death of enlightenment. Have faith. Have
faith, not only in your own goodness but also in that of others. Have
faith in people even when you know they are deceiving you. Have faith
that things will always work out for the good. Have faith that the sea
will not betray your trust and will not swallow you even if you have not
offered your prayers to the sea god. Have faith that the sea god is nota
monster who will, like a jealous woman, take his revenge upon you if you
don't present him gifts. Above all, have faith in divinity. You don't have
to belong to a particular creed or religion to become such a believer. If
you are a Muslim, then become a good Muslim of such repute that no
one can say you have brought disrepute to the religion of Islam. If you
are a Christian, then become a true disciple of Christ and if you a?
Jew, then follow the message of Moses to the core.’ ,
. The captain was moved to tears while listening to Guru Nanaks
_ sermon. He thought about all the people he had wronged in his lifetime.
He thought about the young Coptic Christian in the ship who had spent
‘several hours exhausting his eyes searching for this shrine and how he

Se ee NS an

—


195
, joked sadly towards the captain

: oe without taking hirn along, He eid ae ‘sembatker Sine the

‘ a wt had wronged hirn Wer the
fall Ps

on

us

a een that ali of therr had their Own ,
“_

nmediate reaction was not 4 fewult of just Aig they carried and
nt Process. The Captain kissed the of his
ee tgudly, allowing the sound to drown in the ‘aia f shh ain and
oad into the fading sun beyond the horizon, anchoeed as ak
ae shone in the sunlight. of the

af

gated after the aborted visit to the temple at Clg H
ded to show me other Hindu temples around the city Tobe

- 1 was focused on shrines that Nanak
tad visted,

There was one more shrine in Karachi which was associated with
Gant Nanak that I had to see. In Iqbal Qaiser’s book, this shrine was said
tobe located on the Justice Kayani Road near Sadar. When I showed
: Humayun the picture of the shrine in the book, he told me that this was



me ht inde 2 ie Soten Ss Vi Pe

106 WALKING WITH NANAK ;

I told hina that flow we were heading towarde the Misr Wee ,
Justice Kayani Road. lebal Qaiser warned fie that the C6 hie the |
picture of the shrine in hie book wae actually net the Fight Wi. |
hook was published before the era of computerised printiny, Whe:
why there were a few pictorial mistakes. Suddenly, frown kerri age og
where the shrine of Nanak was situated, we were leet in thie Ay hing
twenty million people
‘Neat Justice Kayani Road, there is ati area kercwey ae Rp egy
is a well-known locality. The gurdwara is there,’ eaid label Qgiege
“What is the name of the temple it is located in?”
“The gurdwara has its own narne. Gurdwara Pehl Paeataly’
Sadia’s friends called up someone he knew who belonged to thy
area. He was told that Rarn Bagh was no longer called Ran Bagh bg
Aram Bagh. The addition of an ‘A’ neutralised its religions connotation,
“My friend has told me that there used to be « gurdwara there bye
it doesn't exist anymore,’ said Ali, Sadia’s friend,
“That's alright. 1 just need to see the space,’ I said, ,
‘TL guess we'll just go there and ask around,’ said Hurnayun, ,
We drove from the newer part of Karachi to the older part, with ie

nial part of Bombay or Colombo,
d visited at the time of Holi l



maw sikhbookcIub.com
NOT HINDU ENOUGH

197
iple while on the other side was ano
the oe da carpet on the floor. A few Hj
can king fun of us.
here ™ d the temple, I noticed cardboard cy

Beh nose of Ram, Krishna and Shiva,

clo ali, which must be a huge affair
outs fot I wal under the roof of the main t
peautiful  idens were painted in bright col
with ine locked and there was a peacock
rempre

ther platform Covered with
ndu children Were standing

ttings of Hindy deities,
These were perhaps cut-
here. There was also some
emple. Pictures of Krishna
ours. The main door of the

guarding the entrance.
Right at that time, an old man with a dark complexion and hunched
g

.. Errat - 1 stopped him and introduced m self, and
back walked . Oe eetion about the temple. ‘This temple is one
followed i - years old,’ he said. Hundred and fifty seemed to be
hundred an 7 all temples here. ‘If you want more information you
the nel dministration of the temple. I’ll take you there. .
“ i this he started walking away while I walked briskly behind
ayin
ingto keep pace wi a olde? asked, pointing at quarters that
Aral a behind the temple. A charpoy had been spread there
were oe edle of the courtyard, where a man was lying, while two young
ve both of them wearing saris, were sitting.
As Most a ee I noticed a man with a long Peard ane ine
cap vnlkon ofone of the buildings along with his wife who
a burga. This was a Muslim a where a few h aly cow were
al The were: crobsbly used in religious Nin da vommunitY here
ome inde iin and the customs of the Hin

to in Lahore.
I t from those that 1 was used
in Karachi were starkly differen

munity
and the com

re elaborately decorated

€ temple was much mo

etmed to be much larger. ‘din
The old man led me into srt ec who wa s nid ee

me t d walked off. The o , to his work.

Wiha fa beh nk at me as if I was a menace

; the temple.
m king him about
"my press card and started asking hi

where he introduced


ww. Khoo khbookclub.com,

WALKING WITH NANAK
198

J don't know exactly how old this temple is but jt jg ati ofA.

Tyee 4

existed before Partition.’ i

He told me that several of Guru Nanak’s followers alsey ¢
this temple, along with a few other devotees. I asked hin if there Wie
picture of Guru Nanak at the temple, similar to the Hindy temple, ,
Punjab. ‘Yes, there is,’ he said. ‘In fact, there is a separate building thee
reserved for the followers of Guru Nanak. It is a gurdwarg and .
to as Pehli Patshah. It is right next to the temple.’

This was the gurdwara I was looking for.

Jt is recorded in the Sikh tradition that Nanak visited this
and visited these two temples, is that right?’ I asked the mar,

7 eo. .
‘No, that is not true at all. Nanak never visited this temple. Ht.

f 4 Page

18 Hef!
HS FE fey.

Teor

remained in Punjab.’

Clearly this guy had no idea about Nanak’s travels.

I walked back to the temple and once again noticed the ews,
constructed building right next to it. In my haste I had missed the Khals,
symbol made on its window and also the saffron Nishan Sahib, the
symbol of the Sikh community, posted on top. I called up Iqbal ¢ Yaiser
and asked him if this was indeed the gurdwara that was constructed
to commemorate the visit of Guru Nanak to this temple. “Yes,” he said

Along with the temple at Clifton, this too must have been 4 historica
Hindu temple at the time and Nanak while visiting this area must hax
visited this place as well. Standing here, I wondered how diferent ts:
place must have been at that time.

8

Humayun wanted to show me Port Grand, the latest addition to Karact:
food scene. Near the port a new food street had been constructed abow
the sea with the latest restaurants. It was also convenient that there ¥*
another Hindu temple there. We decided to head in that direction
see the temple and also have lunch.

After giving the car to the valet we walked out of the gate of the
Port Grand and headed to a small street next to it where the temp! ee
situated. Right on top of the temple, within the complex of Port Gr
was a newly constructed mosque for tourists.


wtw.sikhbookclub.com
NOT HINDU ENOUGH
199

There were (wo entrances to the temple

mens while the other one was for men
wo . mo ,
ents Section was an old wom a charpoy with
1 ¢

The woman was wearing a colourful sari,‘C

@ younger

mati. an We go inside” asked

Sadia. , ,
We walked in the door. There

‘Yes,’ she said.

We S < ‘ >
fetalieas ts a small temple next to the entrance.
inside were a few people collecting material for food on one side of the

om. This probably was an offering from a rich Hindu. They seemed
sperturbed by our presence. Right in front of us was the sea and ahead
of that was a mangrove forest. A young boy lying on his back on top of
,small boat was floating in the sea. There Were stairs leading into the
water, Which was blackened by all the industrial waste that is disposed
into the sea. Several small boats were tied |

next to the stairs. This was a
fishermen’s community. The bridge of Port Grand too was in front of us,

beyond which lay the port. On one side there were numerous pigeons
guttering on the floor, pecking at the rice that was offered to them,

Around us were a couple of other rooms, all of which were reserved
for different deities. Sadia was busy photographing the temple when
one of the men standing there told her sternly to stop photographing.
[noticed a mural on the wall behind him, with a male deity sitting on
top of a giant fish. Layers of water had been depicted underneath the
ish. This was the famous Hindu deity also revered in certain Muslim
taditions—Jhule Lal.

Given the backdrop of Port Grand, the temple was in a sad state.
twas hardly noticeable in this posh area, where the gentry of the city
descend every evening. Karachi is a politically contested ate ae
‘sence it belongs to such fisherfolk communities who ives _
Kolachi became Karachi. Today, they are the most neglecte me )
ofthe city. This entire area is known as the area of Mai Kolachi.

Why is it called Mai Kolachi?’ I asked Humayun: a

According to the legend there was an old ean Hies son was killed
“own as Mai Kolachi. Mai means an old ae fish and retrieved
“afish. It is said that she tore apart the belly . sam e to be known as
a ‘on. It is because of her bravery that this area
“lay Kolach}.’


wont sishbookclub.com|
200 WALKING WITH NANAK

It seemed to be as if these Hindu fisherfolk

<y . ; are now
connection that the city of Karachi has with the vill

¢ a 7 On
. . age of Kolach; ly
village that Nanak once visited. ‘AL, the

@

The edge of the boat narrowly missed the heads of two Wome
were sitting on the other boat. Both of them were wearing black ° Who
‘These women continued yelling at the captain as he ignored
manoeuvred the boat out of the mess of the several boats aro

‘Do you understand their language?’ I asked Huma

burgas
them and
Und us,
. oci 7 yun, who Was
sitting next to me on the boat. 'Yes. I can make sense of it. But their Sindh;
paternal side
and Shikarpur on his maternal side. “This language that these women
are speaking is a combination of Sindhi and Makrani,’

The port of Karachi, the symbol of the origin of this Brand city is q
modest structure, a minor tower rising from the middle of a single-storey
building. A clock is placed within the tower. The port symbolizes colonial
rule. At the time of Partition, Karachi was a minor port city with peacefil
beaches. There were a few British clubs here, along with bungalows. The
rest of the community comprised the indigenous fisherfolk, who are now
a minority in their own land.

Partition changed the landscape of this city. Millions of migrants
who had arrived from India were herded together to this port city, and
within no time, Karachi emerged as the largest city of Pakistan and one
of the biggest in the world. It has been growing exponentially ever since.

A little girl sitting across from me dipped her hand into a bag that her
mother was holding. She picked up a little piece of dough and making
a round ball out of it threw it into the water. I figured that she probably
did that to attract the small fish swimming near the surface of the wate
but no fish appeared. The piece of dough disappeared into the depths ‘
this green water, while plastic bottles and bags that other travellers ha
thrown over the years floated on the surface. The girl and the woma®
continued throwing dough into the water but in vain. ,

Out in the sea, away from the port, the boat gained speed. A gr? :

is ditferent from ours.’ Humayun belongs to Thatta on his



Seaieteye ie

vewrw.sikhbookctub.com)
enti es CHANEL, sarencappeneste tf phe yw

pasitit

NOT HINDU ENOUGH 204

sulls started to follow us. They dived towards the sea to catch the
peing thrown into the water. Some of them caught the dough
nile others dipped their beaks into the water, Most of them

ah #4
sous
the ae
atch.

w a
wise thei
"Ag we moved further away trom the port I could see giant ships

anchored neat the shore with several containers each. Behind them were

she cranes of the port that removed the containers from the ship.

We were on our way tO the small island of Manora not far from
Karachi. This island has been connected with the mainland recently
hut travel by boat is still the preferred way of getting here. W hile in
Karachi 1 was informed by a local Sikh that there was a gurdwara on
the island called the Guru Nanak Gurdwara. When I asked him if it
was possible that Guru Nanak had visited that place, he said that it was
not a possibility. Like the Hindus that I had encountered here, he also
sefused to entertain the idea that Nanak had ever visited the southern
soast, Humayun and I were now on this boat to see that gurdwara.
There was also an abandoned Hindu temple here which was on our list
of things to see.

Boats travel to and fro between Karachi and Manora every half
an hour, | looked at the crowd of people to see if they were all tourists
like us or also residents. Most of them came across as tourists but there
were some residents from the island who needed to travel to Karachi
tor supplies.

The tyres attached to the edge of the boat bumped into the pillars
supporting the port at Manora. We got out of the boat and headed
towards the island. There was a gate next to the port which said that
everyone entering Manora necded to pay twenty rupees, except tor

residents.

Humayun led the way while I walked not far behind. | had imagined
this to be an isolated place but there were several restaurants and shops
here. A few of the buildings were abandoned but a majority of them
were occupied. A large portion of the island is under the control of the
Navy, which monitors the sea regularly to ward off infiltration from India.
There were Navy guards and check posts at regular intervals scattered

all over the island.


Www, sik hbookclub.com,

WALKING WETH NANAK
“)?
While walking, on the pavement, | peeped into one of the
ind saw a huge banyan Wee behind it,on which was at plaque which y, )
‘ ove ‘ By a8

‘Gurdwara GUC Nanak and the lemple of Valmiki’. Taking my sho.
“ There were A
t entered the shrine Ihere were two rooms he

hotise '

off next to the tree, IC, typ

ol which wits dedicated to Gruru Nanak while the othe Was dediy ated
vo the Hindu deity Valmiki IL entered the room of Cyuru Nanak, Guy
Granth Sahib was placed in front of me, covered ina red cloth. On re
of the Gurdwara Panja Sahib and also one of (

Ls } Nitty
li Gandhart, in which Guru Nanak is nto

; ; Ping
1 towards him from the top of a mounty,

walls were posters
Nanak, Mardana and Wi
with his hand, a roe k hurlec

where the Muslim saint was,
Ag I walked out of the gurdwara, | noticed a short dark old may

and vest emerging from one of the rooms, Aftey

an

wearing only a lungi
noticing us he went and wore his pyjama and shirt and greeted us, Hy

had a long beard and a turban similar to the Sikhs of Punjab,

‘Are you from Manora?’ | asked him.

‘Our family has been living here since before Partition, We originally
belonged to Amritsar,’ he said.

‘Do you think Nanak ever visited this place?’ | asked him.

‘Absolutely not. He was from Punjab, Nankana Sahib.’

The name of this man was Jeeta Singh and our conversation took
place in Punjabi, an aberration in Karachi. Jeeta Singh told me that every
November when the festival of Guru Nanak is celebrated at Nankana
Sahib he too arranges a small festival at this temple. Several Hindus and
Sikhs from Karachi and other areas come here at that time. He tells me
that there is another gurdwara here, also known as the Gurdwara of Guru
Nanak and it is not too far from the Hindu temple. After taking down
the directions to that temple and the shrine, we headed off.

It was a picturesque beach, with golden sand and shiny blue water
Far away, near the horizon, the sun was preparing to dip into the wate!
and its reflection burned the sca. Behind us, towards the Wester side,
emerging from the mist was the Makran mountain range, the boundary
line between Sindh and Baluchistan. In front of us was the skyline °
polluted Karachi.

My feet sank into the sand, This was a popular tourist destinatio”



Ww yp sata Vat iin : . ‘
swsiithbookclub. com

NOT HINDU ENOUGH

2653

families and couples were walking on the b

se ames. Navy patrols patrolled the road a

of "he Hindu temple was hard to miss. It was a tall conical

acted right on the beach. During the summers the waters wrobab

” ill the way to the base of the temple. I didn’t know how old this

_ vewas but | allowed my imagination to provide it with its historical
erhaps this was originally constructe

each hand in hand,

t regular intervals.

eontext. ee d by the indigenous
communi) of this area many centuries ago and renovated several times
over the years.

‘The way into the temple was cordoned off so we climbed the fence
shat was protecting it and entered. On top of the cone was the face of
Hindu deity whom | could not associate with any of the gods in the
Hindu pantheon. This too must have been part of the local culture. The
#om was locked. The floor was constructed out of tiles which were also
placed on the adjoining walls. There were figures of Hindu deities on
these tiles, pictures of Krishna and Radha and Ram and Sita. All the
faces had been wiped clean owing to the Islamic sensibilities of the newer
communities settled here.

Is it possible that Nanak ever travelled to this island? It is recorded
in Sikh heritage that he came to the village of Kolachi and then visited
the temple of a sea god for which he had to take a boat and travel to an
sland neighbouring Kolachi. Later Sikh writers have asserted that this
was the temple at Clifton. However, that temple was on the mainland, so
Nanak travelling there on a boat makes no sense. On the other hand he
would have needed to travel on a boat to come to the island of Manora.
We will never know for sure if Nanak ever reached here.

A cool breeze was flowing from the sea. Humayun was busy
Photographing this beautiful temple, while I was immersed in my
thoughts, Sitting here I thought about what Jeeta Singh had said. He had
‘ud that Nanak had never left Nankana Sahib, the place of his birth. Was

‘talking about himself or Nanak? Nanak in this case was a reflection of

i ne self. We are all like that. We project ourselves ane other
“ater Gurus, Nanak was a reflection of themselves. nus wa P

me as well, My interpretation of Nanak is also a reflection of my

With
Wn self Sitting at the temple, 1 realised that my depiction of Nanak in



—tiw sikhbookclub, com

THE PROPHECY 5

Accompanying Tripta was a retinue of half dozen attendants including
male and female servants.

It was a short walk to the temple. From afar one could see a tall
mound rising from the middle of the trees. A steep staircase led to the
top, which was packed with ascending and descending pilgrims. At the
top was a small temple constructed of thick black stone. All over the
mound there were small rooms made of mud and stone for jogis and fakirs
to mediate. At the base of the mound was a small city of tents. These
belonged to traders who had been attracted by the lure of the pilgrims.

Walking through the streets of this makeshift settlement, rubbing
shoulders with other pilgrims, Tripta stopped in front of a stall selling
wooden carts and other toys for children. She picked up a small cart and
inspected it closely. ‘Do you want this for your son?’ asked the vendor, a
plump woman sitting on a wooden platform. Her son was sitting next
to her and was busy counting the money they had made since morning.
Tripta caught a glimpse of the child and said, ‘Yes.’

‘Stay here at the base and buy everyone else something to eat,’ said
Tripta to the head servant, Kanwal, a middle-aged man, handing him a
few coins. Carrying a few rose petals and a wooden cart she prepared to
climb this set of around one thousand steps.

At the top, the first thing that captured her attention was the
panoramic view. A gentle wind blew across the plain. She looked in
vain towards the direction of Talwindi trying to locate the silhouette of
distant homes. Eagles overhead glided gently in the wind. Cut off from
civilization, this was a magical place, truly spiritual.

Tripta, who was fond of losing herself in her imagination, used
these moments to take a break from her daily chores. She was brought
back to reality by the tolling of a bell. The female devotee ahead of her
in line had returned following her darshan of the goddess and now it
was her turn. She entered by ringing the bell thrice. The priest wearing
a white cho/a (gown) with a saffron scarf around his neck was squatting
on the floor, collecting the offerings presented to him by devotees. She
handed him the rose petals. He took it and then presented one back
to Tripta, saying, ‘Eat this.’ She wanted to ask him why but the priest’s
hurried manner intimidated her. In front of her was a rock, the object


W:3 khbookclub.com,

www.s khboos—

204 WALKING WITH NANAK
rsion of Nanak. This is nothi
F agi

B Dut what

this book is not an accurate ve
anak must have +o
N ust have been different ¢,

I want Nanak to be like. In reality,
my understanding of him.

We walked onto a road faci
as a small single storey structure painted orange. wh:
Re, While

the Khalsa flag stood next to it. The Khalsa symbol was embossed on th
windows of the gurdwara. After asking around we found the cia
of the temple, who was a practising Sikh with a turban and a long beard
His name was Rajesh. He agreed to show us the shrine from the inside

It was a recently renovated structure with the Granth Sahib in the
centre. There were pictures of Guru Gobind Singh and the Golden
Temple on the walls. This shrine which was originally constructed
to honour the memory of Guru Nanak had now been completely

nto the beliefs of the Khalsa. The distinctions between the
Nanak have now become

Om
ng the temple and saw another gurdw
ara

in front of us. It w

incorporated
teachings of the other Gurus and that of Guru

blurred for his followers.
Earlier there were communities who refused to incorporate

themselves into the Khalsa of Guru Gobind. They referred to themselves
as the followers of Guru Nanak. They still exist in Sindh and in Khyber
Pakhtunkhwa. Baptised Sikhs look down upon them. But here at the
shrine, looking at how Rajesh had transformed this shrine from that
of Guru Nanak to a shrine of the Khalsa, I could see that slowly these
independent followers of Nanak were now merging into the larger
groups of Sikhs.

Rajesh’s family once belonged to that sect of Hindus. Today, they
refer to themselves as Sikhs. Is this because of the distinct boundary
lines that are now solidifying between different religious communities:
Hindus, Muslims, Sikhs and Christians? Does that mean that Nanak’
legacy in its true essence is also slowly disappearing?


Www.sikhbookclub.com,

AS thn

15

—Hargobind as his spiritual successor, Guru Hargobind decided to
- give darshan to his followers. ‘he throne of the Guru, the Akal Takhr,
_ translated as the Eternal Throne, had also been prepared by then. On
this auspicious day the Guru dressed himself as a royal, wearing churidar
pyjama, a saffron gown and a beautiful turban with an aigrette fixed on
a it. There was a precious necklace around his neck, while two swords were
~ hanging to his left and right.>”
These swords signified the new interpretation the Guru had given
to the Sikh religion. When Hargobind was to be appointed as the new
Guru of the Sikh community after the assassination of his father, he
refused to take up the religious symbols of Guruhood that were borne by
the Gurus before him. Instead he picked up the turban with an aigrette
and placed two swords upon himself. On the day of his anointment he
_ Steported to have said, ‘My rosary shall be the sword belt and on my
= ‘urban, | shall wear the emblem of royalty.*

The Guru introduced the concept of miri-pirt into the Sikh religion,

Which was symbolised by the two swords he chose to wear. One sword

aed ‘miri’ which meant temporal power while the other, the Guru

€presented ‘piri,’ which was spiritual prowess.

an oe

: a History of the Sikh Gurus Retold, page 481
: bid. Page 475



206 WALKING WITH NANAK

Hargobind deliberately wanted to be seen as regal. It is for
that along with the construction of the Akal Takht he also Started hoi
a saffron flag facing it. This was to eventually become Nishan Sahih
symbol of the Khalsa. He also kept with himself a large drum called the
nagar, which at that time was used by a ruler to summon his subjects. Ay

pet.
Doctrine and

this Feason

a symbol of his new status the Guru also kept a hawk as a
P. S. Grewal points out in his article ‘Nanak’s
Feudalization of Sikh Gurudom’ that the militarisation of the Sikh
community had started during the period of the fifth Sikh Guru, Cas
Asjan, but it was during the time of Guru Hargobind that it os;
impetus. Initially, the Guru raised fifty-two bodyguards who would
accompany him wherever he went. Along with this he started working on
raising an army who were given the title of Sant Sipahi or saint soldiers,
There were five hundred soldiers to begin with. They were not paid a
salary but were exempt from paying the required tribute to the Gury.
Mohsin Fani, a Persian historian from the seventeenth century,
who had a friendly relationship with the Guru, says that the number
of Sant Sipahi was seven hundred cavaliers and sixty artillery men,*
In addition to this the Guru also retained Afghan mercenaries whom
Cunningham identifies as criminal elements.© An akhara (teaini
hall) was constructed facing the Akal Takht where the soldiers practised
wrestling and engaged in other physical exercises, Sant Sipahi were also
structed in the various arts of warfare. In 1660, the Guru ordered the
astruction of a fort wall around the city of Amritsar. cali
War songs too became a regular feature of the reign of the
u, who was, according to Sikh theology, the fifth inca



Wwww.sikhbookclub.com:
Pigs nce int celine amenmntioricaticsnaniy etd
GURU HARGOBIND
207

Ns to his devotees
d of money as a
Since Guru Arjan

iVi ay the Gur
. of Akal Takht, giving his subj u sat on
vag throne |  Slving his subjects a chance for darshan. his
,

ees P resented the Guru with the gifts that he had asked for. Th
: on of the Sikh community began with the rise of Hargobind

“ ‘Ccal throne of Sikhis
wo the pontilic m and hence started a new chapter in

the? should offer him arms and horses insteg
rf qu . e > eo
Prev wnich the Guru was expected to receive ever
m4 the rule of Dasawandh (one-tenth). On the d

asset .

sikh history:

~ There is no doubt that Guru Hargobind had a deep impact on the
philosophy of the Sikh religion. His sword was a cherished possession
fr his son, Guru Tegh Bahadur, when he rose to the pontifical throne.
his sword was then passed on to Guru Gobind Singh who in many
ways can be seen as the true descendant of Guru Hargobind. Looking
the histories of these two Gurus, Hargobind and Gobind Singh, it
snot difficult to identify the similarities in their approach. Like Guru
Hargobind, Guru Gobind too loved war epics, used to hunt regularly
ind took an active part in military exercises.

Many critics of the Guru have identified the militaristic features
of the reign of the Guru as being a departure from the teachings of
the early Gurus. It has been stated that the religion founded by Nanak
whereas Guru Hargobind added the fervour
of warfare into it. It is argued that the Guru was too drawn to the
glamour of politics and arms which took him away from the religious
leadership which was originally what the seat of the Guru was meant

. < S,
- to exemplify. The critics point out that unlike the previous Guru

Hargobind did not even compose 2 single hymn, in support of this

argument. Dev, Amar Das
| Coming from Nanak and passing through Angad ° itution of
Ram Das and then Agsjan, it is not difficult to see that the — ‘bind
Curuhood changed drastically under the leadership oe of the
and hence brought about the change in the religion oe this change
community. However, it would be unfair t0 amu accepted the
Mthout taking into account the context in which the nin

| ,;
“adership of the Sikh community.

Through his Masands the Guru had given instruct;
k . O

was peaceful and gentle,



of Jahangir served as an excuse for the militarisation of the 9

www.sikhbookclub.com,
A PALS AL a ndadadententnctachid
208 WALKING WITH NANAK

Guruhood was bestowed upon Hargobind when his fathe
Arjan, was summoned to Lahore by Emperor Jahangir to os t
role during the rebellion of Prince Khusro against his father, ¢
Arjan knew that he might not return from his trial and hence b Ury
his departure he appointed Hargobind as the sixth Guru, Gun Cfore
was subsequently martyred, throwing the Sikh community into dj
Guru Hargobind was appointed the leader of the Sikh commy nartay,
a time when they were suffering from an existential crisis, Their :
had just been assassinated by the Mughal Emperor and there wa _
way for them to fight back. “

There were different opinions as to what was to be the next step of
the Sikh Guru. One suggestion was that the Sikh community shoulg
completely disavow any form of interference in politics and become
a purely religious group, while there was another swell of support for
revenge. It was in such an environment that Guru Hargobind decided
to militarise the Sikh community. It was argued that it was un-Sikh like
to bear oppression. Guru Hargobind made it the duty of a Sikh to fight
oppression and be unafraid to die in the process if need be, following
the example of Guru Arjan.

The martyrdom of Guru Arjan provided the Sikh community with
a cohesive motivation which united them against the tyranny of the
Mughal Emperor Jahangir. In the interpretation of religious history,
Jahangir became the oppressor while Guru Arjan and Guru Hargobind
the victims, similar to the situation in the case of Aurangzeb and Guru
Tegh Bahadur and Guru Gobind Singh.

The reality, however, is much more complex. Whereas the op

Cus
Plain hj

pression

“Le hie di €s
community, Hargobind eventually managed to reconcile his differen¢

with Emperor Jahangir. In fact, some claims have asserted that Hlargobin
joined his employment, serving him in the Punjab. The Sikh nnn
the story states that this is because Jahangir eventually becam® ke
more religiously tolerant towards non-Muslims, which might _ tl
case, but is quiet about the politics of the Guru. Hargobind and J shar
eventually established a cordial relationship and the former is si we
assisted the Emperor to overcome Tara Chand of Nalagarh who ‘


sURU HARGOBIND

209

vist the Emperor for a long time 61 1, -
ging 28" : G = 4 ng time."" Ttis h
al ji motives of the Guru in forming
sulle’

- ard to ignore the
. sticatee the ‘tyrant’
" ing angir, Gur He, his father.

Fated in Gwalior jail on the orders of the Emin ~
rations are put forward to explain the imprisonmen. or Several
v o¢which is that the G uru had retained the money th: -
. him bY the C ourt to be disbursed to his troops. Once again, this
. indication of employment of the Guru by the Mughal Em seror
the Sikh version of the story is that the Emperor felt threatened by
the growing militarisation of the Guru. It is believed that the Guru
was released after the Muslim saint Mian Mir, who was also a friend of
Guru Arjan, interceded on behalf of Guru Hargobind.® It is believed
shat the relationship between the Guru and the Emperor improved after

she former was released from jail.

The relationship between the Sikhs and the Mughals deteriorated
rapidly after the ascension of Jahangir’s son Shahjahan to the throne.
Sikh sources claim that to appease the religiously orthodox segment
of his court, the Emperor, like Jahangir of the early days, also showed
intolerance towards non-Muslims. Three battles were fought between
the Mughal forces and those of the Gurus and all of them were won
by the Sikhs. These were the battles of Amritsar, Lahira and Kartarpur.
After the final battle, Guru Hargobind decided to settle at Kartarpur,
which is explained as the reason for peace between the Mughals and the
Sikhs. Kartarpur is located in a somewhat desolate place and is not as
accessible as Amritsar. All these victories under the leadership of Guru
Hargobind provided a morale boost to the weak Sikh community, who
started viewing themselves as a divinely favoured comma C

Guru Hargobind remains one of the most controversia ‘ ars
twas his policy of militarisation that gave 4 new face to the peace

Tis policy of m aid the foundations of the
religious community of Guru Nanak. He lai

ty

‘ontemporary face of Sikhism.

a frie
ho had been responsible for the
the period of Emperor Jah

Guru,
at Was given

——

4 a age 506
"Gandhi, History of the Sikh Gurus Retold, page
6271.
. lbid., page 500
311.

lbid., page 505



Wwww.s: khbookclub.com

16
THE SHIVA OF MY IMAGINATION

The chill pierced the bare feet of the pilgrims and sent them jumping on
the marble floor. It was a cold February night and it had been raining all
day. It was the annual festival of Shivratri at the holiest of holy temples in
Punjab—Katas Raj. Situated on the slope of the mountain, this complex
was a collection of temples located around a sacred pond. This pool which
was constructed in the shape of an eye was created when Lord Shiva shed
a tear after his wife Sati passed away, or so the story goes. His tear, ina
beautiful emerald shade, could wash away the gravest of sins. Pilgrims
from hundreds of kilometres away came here to purify their lives.
One of the temples constructed at the edge of the pool was dedicated
to Lord Shiva. This was the most important temple here. There were
temples dedicated to the goddesses Kali and Durga here as well but after
the pond the focal point of the complex remained the temple dedicated to
Shiva. It is believed that these temples were constructed by the Pandavs
brothers when they were sent on a thirteen year exile after their cousi™
the Kauravas took over the throne. In the Mahabharata these remples
are mentioned as sacred spaces that could uplift the soul of a ane
Standing on the edge, Mardana observed the proceedings do
temple below him. At the shrine of Shiva, devotees were bathing
with milk, while others stood behind, singing his praises. Some sad
and placed them in the pond. They were then taken away bya acne
which emerged from the pond and disappeared into the mountains



‘aww. sikhBookclub com

THE SHIVA OF MY IMAGINATION
21}

efor Acro™ rhe - ‘ eure was also a small cave where a few yogi

ie evotees of Lord Shiva, sat in meditative postures. Mardana re

wee A trail of pilgrims ascending to the top of the mountain wh cou
temples and peaceful places to meditate. ere there

were other
et night, except for the sounds of the bhajans that
s that were

It was 4 qui
coming from the temple. The rain had ceased and in a full moon all th
€

Jouds had disappeared while bright stars emerged from their hidin
jyces. It was one of the most beautiful night skies Mardana had wus
seen, He thought about his time in Sri Lanka, where together Nanak
and be had climbed Adam's peak. There too, the sky was as clear as it
was here. Mardana wanted to share his observation with his best friend
but he was busy. Nanak was sitting with the devotees who were gathered
atthe temple of Shiva.
Being residents of Punjab, both Nanak and Mardana had heard about
h was about fifty kos from Talwindi. Among the several
he outskirts of Talwindi, several had spent a
here or were en route to here. While he was
i, he had made plans to visit the temple but
fe had prevented that. Now that Nanak had
heading north to the Himalayas,

this temple whic
yogis that Nanak met on t
large portion of their lives
still a youngster at Talwind
difficulties in his personal li
travelled East and South and was now
he decided to stop at this temple.
Sitting inside the temple amongs
his friend who was sitting on top of t
for him. Nanak did not want to abandon

a Muslim, Mardana would not have been a
Hindu space. If it was about his personal convictions then Nanak too

would have boycotted any place that did not allow his friend, but here,
his aim was to end the exploitation of religion by priests and pandits. He
Wanted to show the people that there is a direct path to God, one that
coesnlt travel through temples and shrines. He needed to show them
that these rituals and rites have nothing t© do with spirituality. For this
he had to mingle with these people, at their shrines, during their rituals.

“te were several religious reformers who criticised such Prep
vile sitting in their isolated jungles, but not many took the bo ad
* actually travelling to such places and criticising them from within.

t the devotees, Nanak looked up at
he adjacent mountain. He felt bad
him but he had to, because being
llowed inside such a sacred


ate partie eae -

349 WALKING WITH NANAK

ae he

This of course had its own challenges. Being surrounded by thove,...
of devotees while telling them that what they were doing ines . ands
was likely to put the critic in danger. Nanak though was not afraid ©
call a spade a spade. He went to Benaras and told the pandits there “
rituals would not help them attain salvation. He travelled to Till, lo. -
and told the ascetics there that they needed to engage with the eel .
save it from evil. Every time he did that, he put himself and Mardana .
a dangerous position. Nanak knew well enough that people got a
charged up, rallying around religion, especially when it gave them ;
sense of security. However, luckily or through divine intervention, he
had stayed clear of any mortal threat.

Often, Mardana had told him to tone down his rhetoric and to
become a little less confrontational. On such occasions Nanak would
listen and then smile politely as if implying that he understood what
was being said and would heed the advice. But then when it mattered,
Nanak would completely disregard these words of caution. Mardana
knew that it was not by divine intervention that they had avoided
physical harm but rather by the magic of Nanak’s words. Nanak had a
way with words and would often engage his enemy in a conversation
out of which no one had yet been able to untangle himself. Such was
the web that Nanak cast with his words. In fact, Mardana believed that
the more people there were when Nanak was challenging a religious
dogma, the better it was, because if Nanak’s words were not having any
impact on the person arguing with him, then the magic would at least
influence someone from the audience, who would prevent any attempt
by the mob to harm the saint. Confident of Nanak’ poetic language
Mardana shut his eyes and lay down on the grass, inhaling the fresh af
_ of the mountains. .

_ He thought about his home, from where they had just returned ne
along trip to the East and South. On the way to Talwindi, Mardam _
made up his mind that he would no longer travel with Nanak. an
separation from family and a life of being constantly on the 108 F
taken its toll and he thought that he would need years to recuperate B sit
5 the exhaustion of the journey. However, he had underestimate?
a of his village. Within days, all the tiredness disappeared from bis 0°


THE SHIVA OF MY IMAGINATION
213

felt like a young man again. A few ;
he when Nanak as ked him if he would feoane their arrival at
Mardana was surprised at his immediate ‘ i to travel north

Only for a little while did he regret his decision .

| oe again walking away from the famili , when both of them
were One Hine ramiliar streets of Talwindi
peading towards the cold North. Their friends and families had gathered
the edge of the town to see them off. Mardana was moved by the tears
af his s00- He felt bad for him as he was growing up without a father
Nanak’s wife Sulakhni was also there along with her two sons Sri Chand
and Lachman Das. Looking at their forlorn faces, Mardana knew that
ys much as the world acknowledged the sagacity and wisdom of their
father, these two boys would never be able to understand the motives
behind their father leaving them at such a tender age.

Throughout the journey, Mardana often brought up the topic of his
family members and how much he missed them. He was surprised that
Nanak did not talk about his family even once. He was surprised to find
an who loved the world so much was so quiet about his own
o ask Nanak several times but he could never
bout the pain he felt of being separated from
ask him if Nanak’s divine mission was

yng
alwindl
with him,

that a m
family. He had planned t
bring himself to ask him a
his own family. He wanted to
unfair on his family but he never could.

Lost in his thoughts, Mardana shut his eyes and listened to the wind
blowing. He was lying under a young peepal tree whose leaves danced
to celebrate the end of the rain. All the sounds from the temple receded
to the periphery and only that of the breeze flowing through the grass

and leaves remained. It was then that he realised that however much he
longed for his home, within him was the soul of a wanderer, which was

also the case with Nanak. 6
i A sudden noise from the temple disturbed Mardanas tranqui "
fe i ther. The activities aroun

ould hear a lot of people speaking toge ned by acertain

the templ d was stun
ple had stopped and everyone !t seeme ;
‘vent. In the darkness of the night Mardana could not see anything but

‘ould very well imagine what could have caused this uproar : uc
Sithering. Amused at the behaviour of his friend he once again lay

°n the grass and attempted to block off all sound.


4 WALKING WITH NANAK

of veneration of this temple. It had a red paw at its centre. “That's the

feet of Kali mata, said the priest in a tone that made it clear that he dig

tot welcome questions. “Here, take this prasad (offerings to and frog, |

divinity), he said, placing some hahwa (a sweet dish) on her palm and |

asked, ‘Do you have a special prayer?”

‘My husband and I have been deprived of the blessing of a child/‘she

said."l have been told that Mata pays particular attention to unfortunate
women like me at this ternple.’

"You have come to the right place. What is that you hold in your |
hand? Is that a cart? Present that to Mata and within a year there will
bea child in your house,’ said the priest as he took the cart and placed it

.

next to the other offerings, which included fruit, coconuts, clothes and —
tose petals. “Go out in the courtyard, he continued. “There is an acacia —
tree there. Take this thread and with it tie seven knots around it. Then —

recite Kai Maha Kali, Jai Ma Kalika, Jai Maha Kali, Jai Ma Kalika, Kaki
Mate, Namo Nama, Kali Mate, Namo Nama, a hundred times sitting |

Miele tliat tart Without scopping: If 2¢ any point you are distracted or | |
_ you stop, start from the beginning again.’ Later in the night when the _

ee me che temple, he took the



a |

244 WALKING WITH NANAK

Rif

Nanak sat patiently in one corner of the temple, while the pandit oe
litres of milk over the s4iv /ing. Sitting in the corner, he looked like.
ordinary sadhu in his saffron garb. The difference was that while ay
of the sadhus were immersed in the spirituality of the Occasion, praying
under their breath as the pandit worshipped the shiv ling, Nanak viewed
the practice with scepticism. He noticed a small passageway way fron
which the milk flowed out of the temple and mixed in the stream that
disappeared under the mountains. He found the practice to be atrocious.
especially when there were so many hungry people to feed. There were
dozens of beggars lined up outside the temple who looked as if they
had not eaten for days. Instead of being poured on a rock, why couldn?
this milk be presented to these poor people outside, as a gift from God,
he wondered?

As the offering of milk to the deity concluded, everyone stood up
and the pandit began leading the communal prayer. People turned to see
who this disrespectful man was who kept sitting while everyone stood up
around him. A sadhu standing next to Nanak nudged him with his leg
and when Nanak looked at him he directed him with his eyes to stand
up. Nanak ignored him and continued looking straight at the shiv ling
Because of Nanak’s audacious behaviour there was unrest in the prayer
No one could concentrate on singing praises to the god, when this man
_ was being so disrespectful right under their noses. The pandit too by now
had noticed Nanak from the corner of his eyes. However, since it ue
considered inauspicious to leave a prayer in the middle, he continu’
with his recitation, planning to rebuke the recalcitrant sadhu later.
_. Perhaps to add fuel to the fire, Nanak got up and left the temple

during the middle of the prayer, an act which sent shock waves
_ the spines of all the devotees. Hurriedly finishing the aarti, the

_ rushed outside to find this blasphemous sadhu. Several holy me? ;

_ been to this temple before him and a lot of them had acted strane
_ but no one had ever been rude to the gods. og gacteet
> “Hey you,’ shouted the priest, locating Nanak sitting with 2
ae dangling in the holy pond not far from the temple of Shiva. How


tk oh club com

PH SHIVA OF My IMAGINATION
i)

245
‘ .. , A)

vo behave in this manner?’ he roared. ‘You hay ,
) , wrought ,
all of us that |} KT A

cl _ SSAC Have gathered here ¥
1. gar : vere. You

have spoiled our aarti for us, Do you know how

| sacred this temple and
ot oe Sttting during the aarti;
then walk out as if this were a trivial aff B ihe aartl and

air? What kind of
» Do you not know how to behave when ana

‘| very well know how to behave during

. e no p
roe upon yoursell but also on t only
\ )

traditions are? How dare you continue

a sadhu are
artis being performed?
an aarti. While you were
o the Eternal God, | was

you
singing in front of that stone, I was praying ¢
performing an aarti tor him,’ said Nanak.

‘Jogi, are you calling the shiv ling a stone? Don't you know th
Shiva has the power to destroy the world with a single d
not believe in the power of our Lord Shiva?’

The priest's words had the desired impact. These words were not
uttered for Nanak but for the pilgrims who were slowly gathering around
these two individuals, listening in on the conversation, The priest knew
that by raising such questions he could incite the crowd which would
then turn hostile towards Nanak. After the priest completed the sentence,
he looked around to the people, seeking support from them, which he
was getting. An offended look had emerged in people's eyes. They were
now waiting to listen to Nanak’s reply and were sure that he would not
be able to emerge victorious from such a rhetorical question. The priest
too believed that he had trapped Nanak.

Nanak knew that he would have to choose his words carefully. He
was after all standing in one of the most sacred temples dedicated ©
Shiva, and his followers were passionate and believed in eearel i
the right causes. If Nanak did not utter the right words, his hte
be in danger.

However, as much as he wanted t he could not help but to
the question in a polite and harmless manner ar the exploitation of
fel angry. Nanak did not have much tolerance tor

. ot stand such
. - ton He also could n
innocent people in the name of religion bout the unknown

j more a
Conversations, which were not about learning the other. He knew that
ut about impressing one’s knowledge hie voice while asking the
tne Priest was doing exactly that by raising .
“St question.

at
ance? Do you

o calm himself down and answer


www.sikhbookclub.com,

216 WALKING WITH NANAK
‘Listen, priest, replied Nanak, this time with some anger in h;
‘T believe in Shiva. He is as much my guru as he is yours. But ia Voice
is not the Shiva of the Hindu trinity which you and other ex me Shiv,
religion, who fool innocent people like the ones around us, usefne of
powers. My Shiva doesn't assist a wrongdoer, no matter how hewn
person strives. My Shiva is the Supreme Creator and His bless ¢ thar
unshakeable. His law is unchallengeable.’ eens ate
The priest was at a loss for words. He did not expect this sort of
comeback. Adept in the use of words and sentence construction i,
priest had never met anyone who could disentangle the web cast by bi
words so quickly. a
‘What aarti were you performing inside the temple, sitting on the
floor, while all of us were standing in the court of Shiva, wise man”

asked the pandit.

‘I, at that time, was in the court of the Lord of the Universe, my
friend. I was accompanied by the entire sky, all its stars and even the
moon, while your mind and heart was turned against it all. I was praying
to the Supreme Lord while you were standing dumbfounded in front of
this stone. While your mind lingered greedily on the offerings betore the
idol, which I hope you enjoy eating, my mind was fixed on the eternal
presence of the Lord. While your mind was disturbed by the noise of
the bells, I was enchanted by the music of the universe and the fragrance

of His presence in nature.’

The priest realised that Nanak had had gotten the better of him in this

conversation. He knew that this holy man was likely to have an answer for
anything that he could throw his way. He was still hopeful though that
the people would turn against Nanak as he had earlier planned. He knew
that Nanak was saying controversial things but there was a conviction
in his voice that had an impact upon the hearts of the people gathered
around him. The priest could see the faces of the people tun soft. o
hoped that in the conversation Nanak would say something unguard
which he could then turn against him. This was not about Shiva of
anymore. This was personal.
‘And may we hear your aarti an
of the Universe?” he asked.

|
d see it performed before the Lot


ee nic ciagln ORE Cpe

www.sikhbookclub.com,

THE SHIVA OF My IMAGINATION
217

your religion might not allow that,’ replied Nanak. ‘F
night have to give up your sacred vows temporarily. My ‘nese shat you
for those who are not willing to tread a difficult path. It rec aire " vai
jo terms with uncertainty. It requires risking losing your religion
O manipulator of words, we will not be impressed by your shallow
; words. SO stop trying to impress this audience. Say simply whatever you
© want to say. :
: What mean to say O wise man is that for me to sing my aarti |
= would require the company of my companion, whose presence you will
~ not be able to tolerate in your sacred temple,’ said Nanak.
‘And why is that?’ roared the priest.
‘Because he was born in the house of a Muslim Mirasi family. Would
a you be able to carry the burden of his family’s sins?’
The crowd gasped at Nanak’s words. Murmurs emerged from
different corners of the crowd. ‘A Muslim, a Muslim’ was on everyone’s
g lips. The priest was caught in his own trap. He had challenged Nanak
fe and now did not want to back down. That would be admitting defeat.
But on the other hand he could never allow the footsteps of a Muslim

to fall on this sacred space.
‘Where is your despicable friend?’ asked the priest in a pensive

manner.
‘He is sitting right there,’ said Nanak, pointing towar
on the mountain facing the temple.
‘Well, he cannot come here but we can g° to him. We will not get
too close to him because I don't feel like taking another dip in the holy
pond on this cold evening. But we will listen to your aarti so that you

are left with no excuse.’

Sitting under the tree, with Marda
Nanak started to sing. The crowd stood
avoid Nanak’s Muslim companion. At the head of the
Pandit with his hands folded across his chest. He stare
Plercing eyes, Nanak sang the following poem

ds a lone tree

na at his side, playing the rubab,
at alittle distance from them, to
crowd stood the

dat Nanak with

In the salver of the firmament,
The sun and the moon shine as lamps;


pookclub.com.

WALKING WITH NANAK
218

The stars are like pear ls for offer t 718°
The fragrance of the sa ndal press is incense,
The breeze blows as Thy royaé fan; .
The forest offers their. flowers to Thee, O Eternal Light.
Thousands are Thine eyes,

And yet Thou hast no eyes,

Thousa nds are Thy forms,

And yet Thou hast no form,

Thousands are Thy feet,

And yet Thou hast no nose.

This wondrous play bewitches me.

In every heart is the same Light;

It is the Light of God,

Which tllumines every soul,

And gives light and fire to everyone.

Through the Guru's Word,

This Light ts revealed within the soul.

What pleaseth the Lord,

Is the best Arati: worship with lamp.

O Lord, my mind yearns for Thy lotus feet,
As the honey-bee for the nectar of the flowers.
Day and night, Lord, I am athirst ‘for Thee,
Give to Nanak lhy water of mercy:

Fe is like the Sarang: the hawk-cuckoo;

That drinks only heavenly rain drops;

And let me repose in the light of Thy Name.“

eg panel moved by the melodious voice and words of Nanak;
followin, the ps, pie arrogant to admit defeat. The pilgrims who "
were now leavi e ‘ bed * pt their distance from Nanak and Mardan?
urged them t "8 te pandit behind and heading towards the duo. They

© sing more songs. The pandit quietly disappeared into the

81, Guru Nanak: Founder of Sikhism, pages 228-229


ee

~onl¥-S!Nbookclub.com

THE SHIVA OF MY IMAGINATION

219

ight returning f° the temple of Shiva; to pray alone this time—f

magi of this strange Jog to wane from the minds of the peopl i the
, | €

saat enfuenced. =i
jus

98

What should have been a minor detour turned out to be a disaster. M
wife Anam and I were driving back to Islamabad after a weekend .
Lahore and I had decided that on the way I would stop at Katas Raj to
ee Nanak's Gurdwara.

[had been to Katas Raj several times but never had I seen the building
which was associated with Guru Nanak. A few years ago when I came
here to document the festival of Maha Shivratri, I asked the local guide
shout the gurdwara. He told me that there was no such building here.
He insisted that he had been working here for over a decade and if there
was a gurdwara, he would have known. I was sure that the gurdwara
njsted because historical records clearly state Nanak visited this sacred
site and Iqbal Qaiser too had seen and photographed the place for his
book. Anam on the other hand had never been to Katas Raj and was
excited about the prospect of finally being able to visit the place she had
heard so much about.

The sacred complex of Katas Raj is only a few kilometres from the
eit of Kallar Kahar on the Motorway. On my last trip there this journey
took us about fifteen minutes; however, this time we had been on the
toad for more than an hour and the complex was nowhere in sight. The
National Highway Authority had recently decided to expand me single
an road, which is why it was dug up and was hardly usable when we
ound ourselves on that road on this unplanned tour. There are ve
“ment factories dotting this area and therefore the political lobbying
expand this road had been intense.

The road dragged on for a long time. The sun slowl
g time. d
1 the sky. Even though this road is reasonably safe and I have travelle

d
“re well after midnight, I still began to 8° worried al ein and
Side of the road I noticed a small road side café where Iq

W.
“once stopped for lunch. I knew that the temple was not far no

y started to sink



Pr 2 at ae

www,sikhbookclub.com |

iG WIT NAK
220 WALKING WITH NA

Placed comfortably within the embrace of the mountains, the ter,
of Katas Raj appeared on the right side of the road. I had seer, thes,
buildings way too many times to be fascinated by them anymore b.
Anam was delighted. There on our right was the haveli of Har; Sing
Nalwa and behind that were the Kashmiri temples dedicated ty Sha,
built in the seventh and eighth century. Hidden behind ther, was,
half excavated stupa (mound ike or hemispherical structure) at leas
four thousand years old and next to the stupa was the temple dedicate
to Ram. The sacred pond, believed to be the tear of Lord Shiyg Was
at the base of these buildings. Across the road were the offices of the
Archaeology Department and nearby was a small hotel.

I had no idea where the Gurdwara of Nanak was. I was sure that |
had explored all the buildings around the complex and the gurdwara had
to be within one of these structures. I parked my car in the parking Jor
and started to climb the stairs that led to the temple of Ram.

Below us the pond of Shiva which had recently been renovated was
brimming with water. There was no garbage floating on the water like
the last time. Several groups of boys had gathered around the pond and
were diving into the water from the rooftops of the buildings around it.
These were all Muslim boys and hence the pond and the complex were
not sacred to them.

Recently the water level of this sacred pool had started to fall. This
was because the cement factories around this area were sucking the
groundwater in this region. Cement being a water-intensive industry
is an environmental hazard. But writers and journalists started writing
about the disappearing pond here, as a result of which the government
woke from its slumber and came to protect this temple. The water level
has now been restored. 7

I approached a tourist guide standing on the stairs and asked him if
he knew where the gurdwara was, even though I was sure that he would
not be able to help me out. “There is no gurdwara here, he insisted, while
I kept arguing that there is one. 4

“T think it is within that building,’I said, pointing towards a gra"
structure that was the temple of Ram.

“There is no gurdwara there. That is a Hindu temple.’

‘But that is also a gurdwara.’

Piles

Jat



THE SHIVA OF MY IMAGINATION

221
‘No.’
| was lost without my mentor, Igbal
ght to the gurdwara. I called hi
t location of the shrine.

Qaiser, who would have taken
me vl exac mon his cell phone and asked
him next to the fort,’ he said. There was on]
rari Singh Nalwa. The temple of Ram was in front of that fort. Iqbal
Quiser confirmed my conviction that the shrine was within the temple.
asked Iqbal Qaiser to explain the exact location to the guide. The guide
ystened to him patiently and after the call told me that he now knew
where the gurdwara was.

Js it within the temple of Ram?’ I asked with an air of confidence.
‘No, he said. I was embarrassed. I had been insisting all this while that
the gurdwara was within the temple and that the guide did not know

ything.

. We walked away from the pool, away from the group of boys having
a good time. The gurdwara was at a little distance from the complex. It
was not renovated as the rest of the complex was. I am not sure if the
department concerned with the renovation of the structure even knew
about the significance of the building. Even the path leading to the
gurdwara had been neglected. We climbed the stairs leading into the
gurdwara and entered the main room where once the Guru Granth
Sahib must have been recited. It was a big building, with several pillars
__ that once supported a roof on top. The roof was now gone. On one side

there was a staircase leading nowhere. Before Partition, this must have

been an impressive structure. It was bigger than I had expected it to be.

Perhaps there must have been few frescoes on the walls as well.

‘We never knew what this building was,’ said the guide, while we
were walking out of the gurdwara.

Now you know,’ I said. ‘You can tell all the tourists that this is the
Gurdwara of Guru Nanak.’

y one fort here, built by

9

afew years ago, Iqbal Qaiser and I were driving back from Pattoki ine
"eof our research trips. This was years before I started working on Guru


empha Ae sit

Www sikhbookclub.com

av

222 WALKING WITH NANAK

Nanak. At that time Iqbal Qaiser and I were travelling eVETY week
spending the entire day with each other, for one of my Projects on te
Multan road. As usual, Iqbal Qaiser and I were engaged in g discuss;,
talking about everything under the sky, ”
‘Iqbal Sahib, in all of your travels what has been the Most difficy},
journey you have ever undertaken?’ I asked. }

Me
N,

He sat silently for a little while, thinking, and then said, think jt
has to be the trip I made to Nanak’s Gurdwara in Jhelum. This
to Rohtas Fort.’

Rohtas Fort is a popular fort located on the Grand Trunk road
constructed by the Afghan King Sher Shah after he defeated the Mughal
Emperor Humayun.

IS next

‘I was accompanied by a friend called Ilyas Ghuman. This was in the
month of June,’ Iqbal Qaiser continued. “We got off on the main road
and then took a rickshaw to the fort. I thought that the gurdwara was
located within the fort. We climbed one of its walls and saw that the
gurdwara was in front of us, just under the shadow of the wall of the
fort. The problem was that there was no way to get there. We climbed
down the wall and started walking towards the gurdwara. From the top
it had looked as if the gurdwara was only a few steps away but when we
started walking we realised that the shrine looked closer than it actually
was. There were shrubs around us with thorns. Throughout the journey
we were picking out thorns from our clothes and feet. We walked for
hours in the scorching heat of June. We were parched. It felt as if we
were going to die.’

‘Finally, after hours, we reached our destination. We fell on the steps
of the gurdwara and passed out. An old man who was working there
came to us and without asking any questions brought us an entire pot of
water. We gulped it down and came back to our senses. When we Wor

able to talk he asked us how we had managed to come via the route ‘
the fort. He told us that there was a simpler route from the road whic
we had missed. He told us that we were lucky to have made it alive ip

_ there. There was quicksand and even wild animals on the way: ° i
that, there were dacoits who had taken refuge in the forest around t
_Tegion who do not allow anyone to pass through alive.’


FHE SHIVA OF MY IMAGINATION

223

vhen | finally got to see the gurdwer
ot Iqbal Qaiser. Jhelum is about . undies Rohtas, I did so
water So once again, this is a place that ic slower Kilometres from
»s opposed rom old oa me. When Nanak decided to heal ah ene
he mountains of the Himalayas he visited Jhelum alone a2 north into
na Hassan Abdal. g with Katas Raj
~ On another occasion, when Anam and I were returning fr
ae decided that we would stop at Rohtas fora little while I arr
gen the fort once but I wanted to show it to Anam. | had fonvotten oil
sbout the gurdwara and the story that Iqbal Qaiser had told rte while
| was en route to this fort. :

Just at a little distance from the fort, I noticed a building with a dome
on top on our right. There was no doubt that this was a Sikh gurdwara.
Ablack corrosive powder had collected on the walls of the building. This
was an abandoned structure. Looking at the building I was reminded
of Iqbal Qaiser’s story, which I told Anam. ‘Let's visit it, she said with
enthusiasm. Anam has a sense of adventure that ] sometimes find hard
to match.

We quickly walked through the remains of the fort, which included
1 baoli (step well) and a couple of abandoned Hindu temples. This was
sot the kind of fort that was found in Lahore, where only royalty stayed.
This was a protective fort as well as a royal fort. There was a palace within
it. There was also a small village within the fort. The fact that the village
was located within the protection of the thick walls of the fort as opposed
to being outside reinforced the notion that this was not a safe location.
The sun had disappeared beyond the horizon and a sharp blue was now
Preading through the sky.

After the nip to the fort we drove ona small road that A
tain road to the shrine. This is the road that Iqbal Qaiser had alm
Facing the shrine in an n field was a grave next to which was 20 ”
ope “3 black flag. It is
2 Dole, hand at the t ,with @ nh

usually the shape of a ; his was a Shia shrine.
ny symbol of Shiaism in South Asia), a sign that ts were a few lamps
Nt grave was covered by a couple of berry Tees: ‘These < still
DI a 7° * This meant that devotees
‘ed next to the grave with oil in them.

oY ,
*€ to the shrine.



THE PROPHECY 7

instructions of the pandit were followed. ‘You at least must have some
money that could buy me food,’ said the mendicant, looking at her and
then the tree as if trying to figure out the conversation between the
two. She nodded and still reciting, unfolded her dupatta to take out a
silver coin and handed it over to the mendicant. He took it and without
thanking her, put it in a pocket of his chola. The confident manner with
which he took the money gave the impression that this was his hard-
earned income.

“Why are you reciting this mantra” He continued talking to her,
despite her reluctance to engage in a conversation. She managed to
finish the mantra a hundred times and in an exasperated tone told him

“Your wish has been granted, ‘said the enigmatic fakir and then asked,
‘Do you know the history of the temple”

‘How do you know that my wish has been granted? she asked him,
surprised at the casual manner of the mendicant.

‘Ihave a special relationship with the goddess. We sort of have a deal.
Ido things for her and as a reward she gives me special knowledge. Tell

ne, do you know how this mound was created” he asked.
_ “What sort of things do you do for her?’ Tripta asked.



www.sikhbookclub.com,

224 WALKING WITH NANAK

We walked into the gurdwara which was a three storey buitg
It was a beautiful structure located on top of a small mound. Ber”
it was a forest on the edge of which was the fort. Iqbal Oaiser Ps
friend must have come from there. Anam and I climbed to the ' 7
the shrine and walked around the dome. It was a beautiful sight - of
was nothing else on the horizon besides the fort, vote
While we were standing on top of the shrine I saw a Motorcyct,
driving on the mud road that we had just used to get to the gurdwar,
There were two men sitting on it, both of them wearing black shalwas
kameez. I hoped that these two men would eventually change their
direction and head away from us but I was hoping against all Possibilities
There was no other route that these men could take. I wasn’t scared fo,
my own safety but for Anam’s. I was also worried about the car.
These two men drove straight into the open plot facing the gurdwars,
passing our car and parked at the base. They then started catering to the
Shia shrine. Anam and I decided that we should head off given the scary
story that we had heard about this place. .
‘Where are you from? asked one of the men in the black shalwar
kameez as we were walking past him. ‘And what are you doing here? he
continued. I gave him a brief introduction about myself. He then said
that we should head out of this place as soon as possible since it was
getting dark and this place was not safe. Without asking any further
questions we walked back to the car and drove away as fast as we could.
While we were still in that locality, heading down to the Grand
Trunk Road, Anam surfed the internet on her Blackberry to find news
about this place. ‘Two tourists beheaded’ was the first link that popped up
Later, when I met Iqbal Qaiser, I shared my story with him. ‘Standing
at that place made me realise how extraordinary Nanak’s journey was,
I said to him. “These two men were travelling without a vehicle. When
Nanak stayed at this place, there was no Rohtas fort, so this must have
been a desolate space. There must have been many more wild animal
here at that time. And yet these men sat here for days, braving not ° i
the climate but also quicksand, animals and hostile humans. This jou
is really not for the faint-hearted.’

i * , . e € jnt?
“Yes, that is correct,’ said Iqbal Qaiser, ‘but you also need to tak


cher thing. You had posessions SRC ae

meses WOE °
fe eooney, ete. that you were worried about, Nanak travelled

Lg

— , material possessions, which meant that the fear of lows was

at att

wt oe. When you have nothing to lowe, there ix no fear.’

Oe estand that, Iqbal Sahib, but what about wild animals? They
x vou. Lam eure at night when Nanak and Mardana axed
cin , fre, these animals must have been attracted towards them.’
ws hah

‘Animals are more scared of humans than humans are of animals.
r ee are the worst kind of animals. Nothing is worse than humans.

Remember that.



Wwww.sikhbookclub.com
eee COM |

17
GURU ARJAN

In Goindwal which is on the river Beas, there was a Hindu named Arjan, in
the garments of saint-hood and sanctity—so much so, that he had captivated
many of the simple-hearted of the Hindus and even the ignorant and foolish
followers with his ways and manners, and they loudly sounded the drums of
his holiness. They called him Guru and from all sides stupid people crowded
to worship and manifest complete faith in him. For three or four generations
they had kept this shop warm. Many times it occurred to me to put a stop to
this vain affair or to bring him to the assembly of the people of Tslam.©
At last, when Khusro passed along this road, this insignificant fellow
(Guru Arjan) proposed to wait upon him. Khusro happened to halt at a place
where he was and he came out and did homage to him. He behaved to Khusro
in certain special ways, and made on his fore-head a finger-mark in saffron
which the Indians call Qashga and is considered propitious. When this came
to my ears and I fully knew his heresies I ordered that he should be brought to
my presence and having handed over his houses, dwelling places and children
to Murtaza Khan and having confiscated his property, Lordered that he should
be dealt with the penal Laws of Yasa."©°
For five days the Guru was tortured. The Laws of Yas
prescribe death, it also ordered torture before capital punis

a did not only
hment.In the

6Gandhi, History of the Sikh Gurus Retold, pages 414-415
STbid., page 415


Wry ooo
tt siKhbookciup |
ome OM,
GURU ARJAN ~
227
walled city of Lahore there is a place near the Ran Mahal
tal Khoi, of the Red Well. It is believed that Atjan ° ” : known as
next t0 this well, which was the haveli of the Mughal Dive, in a room
ytthe time. Guru Arjan was tortured there. an of Lahore

In the burning heat of summer, boiling g

head, while he was immersed ina cauldron - afi rae of his
days of torture the body of the Guru gave up and he oassed . After five
she bank of the river. His body was then thrown into the river oN near
Lahore Fort there is a small yellow structure which is now referred eo °
the samadhi of Guru Arjan. It is believed that the Guru lost his life there

The Sikh version of the story, emerging out of a religious ethos is ;
kttle more elaborate. It recalls that the Guru bore his punishment with
patience. During his torture, it is believed that his friend, the Muslim
aint of Lahore, Mian Mir, came to him and asked for permission to
bury alive his oppressors. The Guru refused. On the fifth day, the Guru
expressed the desire to take a dip in the waters of the Ravi. He was given
permission. After taking a dip the Guru did not emerge from the water.
The Sikhs believe that the Guru had performed a miracle and passed
onto the other world.

There are two reasons which explain why Guru Arjan was assassinated
by the Mughal Emperor. The traditional Sikh version of the story is that
Arjan was martyred due to the connivance of a Hindu Khatri called
Chandu Lal who was appointed as the Diwan of Lahore by the Mughal
authorities, Chandu Lal asked for Hargobind’s hand for his daughter in
marriage. Guru Arjan refused, saying that his was a spiritual journey and
he did not want to be associated with the political aristocracy: Taking
the rejection personally, Chandu Lal began conspiring against the me
along with the Guru's disgruntled brother Prithi Chand. It was
influence over the Mughal court that eventually led to the assassinatt
of the Guru.

Prithi Chand was the eldest brother of the Guru,

against his brother and father when Guru epee
OVer him as the subsequent Guru. Things fell apart e

who had turned

father and



aie ane RY ORAM mL NNN TE
a Sgt PPLE a

WALKING WITH NANAK

son when Arjan was sent to Lahore by Ram Das to attend his neph,.,:
wedding“ After the wedding Arjan wrote to Guru Ram Das ° ews
times, seeking permission to return home but all those letters fee
the hands of Prithi C hand, who hid them. He was making sure +.
Arjan was removed from the picture and had no chance of inherig ;
the Guruship. =
By the time of Guru Ram Das the institution of Guruhood had

le power and wealth unlike the time of any previous

acquired considerabl
pa P

Guru. Guru Ram Das had a jagir where he laid the foundation of the
city of Ramdaspur, which eventually became Amritsar, one of the holiest
Sikh community. Guru Ram Das was also responsible for

the establishment of the Masand system, which brought power and
wealth to the Guru, as the deputies of the Guru spread to various parts

cities for the

of the country.
Keeping in mind the development of the institution of Guruhood,

one can imagine the enthusiasm of Prithi Chand to inherit not only
his father’s property but also his legacy, which at this time had started
bringing in rich rewards.

Arjan continued writing to his
sion to come back to his family

father from Lahore, asking for
sion but all of his letters fell into Prithi

Chand’s hands. When Guru Ram Das finally discovered his eldest son's
deception he called Arjan back and disowned Prithi Chand. A few days

later he appointed Arjan as the next Guru.

Conniving with rebel Masands, Prithi Chand looked for help from
Mughal officials to inherit his father’s property. According to Sikh sources
(which are biased against him) Prithi Chand also used his connections
with the Mughals and complained to the Mughal Emperor Akbar
about his younger brother, Guru Arjan. After Guru Arjan completed
the compilation of the Ad Granth, it was due to the connivance of Prith’
Chand that he was summoned to court to explain the anti-Muslim 2°
anti-Hindu content of the book as stated by the rebel brother. Arjan sent

one of the senior members of the community, Bhai Gurdas, t0 court
- who after reciting from the Granth clarified the misunderstanding:

perms

“Singh, The History of Sikh Gurus, pages 57-58


StwSlhbOOK club, comm

GURU ARJAN
229
Gj s believe mat “ “ the ‘toler ant’ Akbar was replaced by the ‘ng
inded Jahangis ¢ ¢ influence of Prithi Chand and his ally Chart,
1 enetrated the thick walls of the Mughal court, which ; m ; andu
ae execution of the Guru. esulted in
Mughal sources, however, and particularly the Tuzk-e-Jahangiri
the qutobiography of Emperor Jahangir, are glaringly silent about the
sole of Chandu Lal. His name is not mentioned anywhere. Jahangir on
the other hand, clearly states that Arjan was punished because of his
gympathies for his rebel son Khusro. .

~ The Mughal Emperor Akbar ruled for a long period of time

(1556-1605). During the later part of his rule when he was busy in

the southern part of the peninsula, his son Salim, the future Jahangir,
rebelled against his father and took control of the northern part of India.
Eventually, Akbar succeeded in quelling the rebellion and forgave his
son naming Jahangir as his successor before his death. However, there
are a few sources which point out that though Akbar named Jahangir as
his successor, the differences between father and son after the rebellion

were permanent. There was a segment of the Mughal court that favoured

the succession of Jahangir’s son Khusro and lobbied for him. This never
happened but during this period Khusro gained considerable power with
the support of powerful nobles.

When Jahangir became the Emperor he was aware of the growing
influence of his son and also wary of the consequences it could have. He
therefore confined his son to the fort of Agra and barred him from leaving
it. However, only five months after the ascension of the Emperor, Khusro
rebelled against his father and moved towards Lahore. His rebellion was
quickly quashed by the Emperor and he was blinded, making him illegible
‘0 ever become Emperor. All his supporters were killed gruesomely and
their bodies were left hanging out in the open for days, as a lesson to
others. From the text mentioned above it is clear that Guru Arjan too was
‘rushed in the fight between the Mughal ‘elephants’, not very cit
“om how Guru Har Rai, Harkrishan and Tegh Bahadur were dragge
nto Mughal politics.

d € assassination of Guru Arjan was the K

‘huge impact on the psyche of the Sikh com

arbala of Sikh history. It
munity and precipitated


2443 WALKING WITH NANAK
the development of the K halea. It 18 using this incident and th F
‘ . € iM;
if,

threat from the Mughals that Hargobind justified hig Militar;
; . ATIS
the Sikhs, a legacy that was completed by Guru Gobind Sin ,
bind Sing

Jere
att, In of

Guru Arjan’s death marks the end of an era in the hist
Mw Sta

TY Of the
ne of th é
pre rfusely and

ahib numb ‘
2218. lhe second highest number is that of Guru Nanak a 974 on
5 py

( ion
Uru Te
Bahadur treaded the middle path between spiritual and religious mate
_ a, rs,
The fact that Tegh Bahadur was initially bypassed by his nephew, Har Ra;
ytd 1,

must have played an important role in establishing his spiritual nature

nistitution of the Guruhood. He was the last Cjuru in the p

q 1 é : J
Crirus who focused solely on spiritual matters. He wrote
has the hizhest number of hyrans in the Guru Granth §

the Grurus before Guru Arjan also composed hymns ‘This tradi
$. it
was broken by his son and then the two subsequent Gurus

Had he too succeeded the pontifical throne of Guruhood at a young
aye, his personality would have perhaps developed in a different manner
One of the biggest achievernents of Guru Arjan during his Guruhood

was the compilation of the Sikh holy book, the Adi Granth. The
compilation of this book played a significant role in the development
of a separate Sikh identity. Before the compilation of the Adi Granth,
the verses of the previous Guru were either found in the oral tradition
or in scattered collections. Guru Arjan brought them all together. It is
also recorded that one of the reasons why Guru Arjan started the work
of compilation was that there were rumours that Meherban, the son
of Prithi Chand, who was now head of a separate sect, was compiling
_ his own version of the Granth, which was to have the poetry of all the
previous Gurus along with his own. The Sikhs claim that this was his
way of stealing the legacy of all the Gurus from the rightful descendant,
Arjan, In order to prevent this development, Guru Arjan had to work

_ on his own version of the Granth.
Another legacy of the Guruship of Arjan that eventu ,
way into the Khalsa of Guru Gobind Singh is the system of Daswan f
‘This was a system by which all the followers of the Guru were exhorte

ally found its

“ON ikky-Guninder Kaur Singh, Sikhism: An Introduction (London: 1.B. 78

2011), page 33



“Mw sikhbookclub.com

GURU ARJAN
244

‘ve one-tenth of their earnings to the Guru through the Masand
pine by the ( dei Even today, Sikhs are required to present one-
enth of their income or sewa (ser vice), a tradition that was started by
Guru Arjan. Whereas on one hand this system secured the econornic base
ifthe Sikh com munity, it also brought wealth and power to the seat of
the Guru and his appointed Masands. Various stories of the corruption
{the Masands are recorded in Sikh history. The system of Masands
yas abolished by Guru Gobind Singh.

Finally, Guru Arjan is also credited with the completion of the Amrit
Sar, the tank of nectar that was started by his father at Rardaspur. After
the completion of the tank, the Harmandir Sahib was constructed there
and hence the first structure of the glorious Golden Temple was raised
sound it, which developed into the city of Amritsar.

|
|
|


18
THE LEGEND

‘The streets of Hassan Abdal had never looked +0 deserted Naju the
fakir turned left from the street of the temple into the street of the
Imambargah. In between lay the old main bazaar, once the pride of the
city, On a regular day this place would have been flooded with people,
some negotiating prices, others simply loitering around, drawn by the
charm of this bazaar. Traders from far away brought their wares here.
‘This was the connecting town between Punjab and the Khyber. But
today, all the shops were shut.

For the arriving Sikh forces this was a hollow victory. They had
roarched into a town abandoned by its citizens, left unprotected for
pillage. Despite such loot available, the Sikh force marched with
discipline. The sounds of their boots echoed through the streets. Their
order was now to see if there were any citizens left in the city. Most of
the Sikh soldiers who had arrived from the Punjab were surprised at
the ease with which they had managed to take over the town. In then
imagination Hassan Abdal had always been a part of the ferocio®

West inhabited by the wild tribesmen, For almost a thousand years is
invaders had crossed into the Punjab from the West. Therefore in the wi
of the Punjabi the West was a fearful place where giants resided. V ¢
these soldiers did not know that the tribal west was still a Jong dita
away from here. This was only the start of the Khyber.

2 at : “3 : gigs aif , , archi
When it was first made public that an army would be


retended to be sick while others «,: | Per Rane a
4 few pretences . said 0 opt out,
! soital. the senior officers of the Khaley army dud aly

pappening. They allowed a few Soldiers to
ee when the news spreading through the
ae they banned soldiers from taking leave for
” un it was made public that Hari Singh News nance
and. He was the valiant commander-in-chief of the ; ote
‘tinguished himself during the campaigns in Kasur Silke na
yultan. Under him the frontiers of the Khalsa Empire had expanded In
nis campaigns he had earned a reputation for himself. He was known as a
aries commander and a merciless ruler He was the kind of commander
who believed that oppression was the best way of con:

trolling a population.
The forces of the Khalsa felt comfortable under him.

Hari Singh Nalwa was yet to enter the city. He was camped out in
the outskirts, on the Grand Trunk Road, waiting for news to arrive from
Hassan Abdal. He did not know that the city was unprotected. Sitting
in his camp he wondered why there was so much silence. The city of
Hassan Abdal was on a small mountain and so it was higher than where
Hari Singh was sitting. He was waiting for screams and the smoke from
the burning houses to rise from the horizon but this conquest appeared
whwardly quiet. He dispatched one of his lieutenants, a Muslim man,
to check on the progress. Hari Singh was not known for his patience.



Ww.s)knbookclub.com,
 ccnneeeemeneminetiniutiniaten

8 WALKING WITH NANAK

Once again Tripta cut him off and asked, ‘But why would Devi Mata
allow you to make unbelievers out of her believers”

‘The fakir answered patiently. He was eager to narrate the story but
also wanted to answer her questions. ‘Well, you see the goddess doesn't
care about rituals and recitation of mantras if they lack conviction and
truth. Several of her “believers” are those who lack this characteristic.
She would rather not have them as her devotees. So | was telling you
about the rakshasa. He wanted to distract the goddess whom he had
mistaken for an ordinary devotee. He would have never done so if he
had known that she was a goddess. But what the rakshasa also did not
understand was the power of a true believer; a true believer, a true bhagat,
is stronger than a devi or rakshasa. With the power of their conviction
they too become divine, defying all sorts of limitations. So when the
rakshasa attempted to devour this lonely woman sitting under this very
acacia tree praying to Brahma, she took her actual form and rose several
kos in height, much higher than the rakshasa himself. She trampled him
under her feet, leaving a mark on the rock with her feet. The sacred rock
you saw inside the temple is her footprint.’

‘But it is so small,’ said Tripta.

“Yes, it has shrunk with age. This is a very old story. Many millennia
ago. Slowly that rock will become so small that it will become invisible
to the eye, and then one day it will disappear. When that happens, the
world will cease to be and the Day of Judgement will come when God
will separate the good ones from the evil ones. Those who have been
kind to orphans and have looked out for their neighbours will be sent to
heaven, where there will be streams of honey and milk and everlasting
youth and beauty, while those who have eaten the flesh of other human
beings will burn in the eternal fire of hell.’

Tripta listened with rapt attention.

‘After destroying the rakshasa, the goddess started to dance. She
danced so furiously that it triggered the process of destroying the
world. With her whirling she sucked in everything—buildings, temples,
mosques, humans, animals, trees, mountains, rivers. All these things piled
up under her feet as she slowly rose towards heaven, her final abode.
Since it was still not the prescribed time for the world to end, Lord


“Ww. sikhbookclub.com,
244 WALKING WITH NANAK

he remembered, he would roam the streets, He Wis an orphan Ag |
Ss eh

¢ Came
a group of fakirs singing and dancing in the streets. They we

the songs of Sufi saints, Naju was mesmerised and eve
stuck to that yroup.

he would play with other children of his age but one day h
. ¢ ACT Og,
re Singing

Fr since thar ¢ .

As a grown man Naju decided to live an indepe

ndent life, Without
associating with any group. Carrying an e&/ara (

a one-string Musica]
instrument) in his hand, he would walk around the narrow Streets of
b xO

Hassan Abdal singing songs that he had learned as a child. He w
well-liked figure in the community. He was a friend to everyone
had no friends. He liked it this way.

as
and still

On the eve of the Sikh invasion, when the augury of approaching
death and destruction arrived in the form of the news of Hari Singh
Nalwa's approach, all the residents of this small town decided to leave
this city and move to the town of Attock, not far from there. While
people were rushing about their homes, packing their belongings, loading
their mules and preparing to leave, Naju was singing songs of patience
and love. ‘He has gone crazy,’ said the people of the town. ‘You should
leave too, Naju. Hari Singh Nalwa will not spare you. He is no friend to
Muslims,’ he was warned.

‘All my life I have been asserting that ] am a Muslim but my Muslim
friends never allowed me to be one. Today thanks to Hari Singh Nalwa,|
have finally become one, why should I then choose to reject this honour?
said Naju and continued to sing.

The Sikh forces found Naju sitting at the shrine and immediately
took him into custody. He was the first living soul they had come across
all day. These soldiers had come here to fight and were emotionally
charged up. Now they were planning to take out their entire wrath on
this Muslim dervish.

But before they could do that Hari Singh Nalwa’s messenger arrived,
asking for updates of the conquest. The soldiers were afraid of Har
Singh’s anger and did not want to tell him that the locals had run wi

_ before the conquest. They knew that in that case Hari Singh might 6

the messenger who brought this inauspicious news to him. So a

_ decided to present Naju to the commander so that any anger that
~ Singh had would be directed towards him.


THE LEGEwy

2%

The poor fakir in tattered clothes was
Jn this mes setting, the condition her aa mre tent,

an it was. He was wearing a patched - BSED YEN Worte
ood the camp had all the luxuries of a palace Tho On the other
carpet on the floor and the furniture was made i wep _
good. Hari Singh Nalwa sat Opposite the standing (u:.t. Arve
, sk gown and there were several Pearl necklace:
beard was long and his expression stern. There was a turban on his head
which matched the purple silk gown that he was wearing The feather
of a female peacock was attached to the front of the turban, white in
colour. There was a small pearl necklace around the turban as well, which
supported a Khalsa symbol in front.

--For the first time, Naju regretted his decision to not abandon the city.
He missed the people who had left. When they were there he had kept
adistance from them on purpose with the belief that he was harnessing
his spiritual skills. Standing here, facing death, he realised that he had
been deluding himself. His spirituality was a garb only for the outside,
hot an ornament that was to be protected within one’s soul. He realised
that he had lived a life of lies, feeding off people, tricking them into
believing that he was somehow closer to God than the rest of them.
Living such a life he had also sold the lie to himself but today all those
delusions had melted away.

He fell at Hari Singh's feet and started to cry. Hari Singh's lieutenants
and other officers laughed at the pitiable state of this Muslim fakir. "Why
did you not run away when you had the chance?’ asked the commander.
Malik, 1 should have,’ cried the fakir. ‘But I could not leave behind the
Ost precious thing I had and there was no way that conld casry i
with me,’ .

What could a man like you have? asked Hari Singh. sated but

Tl show it to you, sir and I know you wont be pani here.”
for that J f your valiant soldiers to carry it here.

1 would need the help of yo fakir. He doubted

Har} Singh wondered if he should pay heed ” i but he allowed

magnus anything the fakir had that could inter Wt also made

"to show him what he had. In making that have him killed after
P his mind that when the fakir returned he would

HW GLE


www.sikhbookclub.com,

WALKING WITH NANAK

Mm
ta
lon

toying with him for a little while. Hari Singh wanted to set an ex

at the beginning of his invasion of the Khyber. He was aware Fis
reputation of the tribal people of this region. He wanted to tel oe
that now it was the time of Punjab to create havoc in the Khyber i
felt the anger of a thousand years running through his veins °

Walking out of the camp, Naju was sure that he would need »
miracle to get out of this situation, a miracle of Nanak to be exact. Whi),
standing facing his death he had devised a plan. A month or so befor
the attack on Hassan Abdal, Naju while walking around the streets, had
found himself in front of the shop of a Muslim mason called Kamma
who was working on a piece of rock. The mason was an expert sculptor
and had been responsible for creating numerous carvings in the temples
of Hassan Abdal.

Many Muslims told Kamma that his work was un-Islamic and that
on the Day of Judgement God would ask him to put life into his creation
but Kamma never took their advice seriously. His family had been in the
masonry profession for several generations. They had been a Hindu family
earlier. To avoid the jaziya tax that the Mughal Emperor Aurangzeb
had reinitiated during his reign, his grandfather had converted to Islam.

Kamma, unlike other Muslims who were embarrassed of their
Hindu past, was proud of his heritage. For him, the work of sculpturing
was not just a profession but an act of devotion that he did to maintain
a link with his Hindu heritage. As a Muslim he was disallowed from
visiting Hindu temples, so he felt that he was present there through his
structures. [his was his spiritual connection.

Naju was a regular visitor to Kamma’s shop. Here he was assured of
food and shelter for as long as he wanted. Kamma on the other hand,
considered Naju to be a man of God and regarded serving him to be
akin to serving God. Within the Islamic tradition he was a devotee ot
the Sufi tradition, as opposed to organised religion. Every Thur sday he

_ visited the Sufi shrines of the city, distributing sweetmeats and food t0
the holy men there. Naju was one of the beneficiaries.
i ‘That day when Naju visited Kamma’s shop, he found him working
on a piece of rock. He had placed his hand in the centre of the rock
he was tracing his hand’s outline on it. After the delineation he cat


~ pee erie
~ww.sikhbookclub.com

THE LEGEND

237

Be rock in such a way that the mark of his hand |
ye that for a particular shrine?’ Naju asked him ett on the rock
No, replied Kamma. “There is not much |
so | decided to amuse 1 _ nowadays and 1a
| ) amu myself with this. Things h .
news of an imminent Sikh attack.’ BS have Deen Sow
as that what K: ing
t Kamma was trying to pass off as a trivial

eras
ea
=

a pore d,
a ever since the
‘The truth w
3 yiece of carving was in fact something close to him. K
: married for several years now but in all of these ears sett had been
. blessed with a child. He was afraid that after hin the © had not Deen
one to keep his legacy alive. His hand print was like a si vo ee
was leaving for posterity. gnature that he
2 Standing in front of Hari Singh, Naju remembered this rock a d

; devised a strategy. He led the four soldiers who were acigimpan in him
to Kamma’s shop. After breaking the locks they found the mi hd one
comer of the shop. Three soldiers carried the rock back to the camp of
Naju walked along.

the commander, while

(O kind ruler, thank you for trusting me. I assure you that you will
not be disappointed. ] present to you a gift that you will highly cherish.
This rock carries the hand print of your Guru Nanak, ’said Naju, pointing
to the hand mark of Kamma. ‘Do you know that your first Guru also
came to Hassan Abdal and spent a few days here? This is recorded in

the Janamsakhis of Bhai Bala.’
, wledge of this. He turned

Hari Singh was surprised at the fakir’s kno
he camp and asked him if this

| to his Granthi who was also present at t
, was true. The Granthi nodded his head and elaborated that on the
1 of Vaisakh, Nanak had visited Hassan Abdal as is recorded in the

Janamsakhis of Bala.
. ‘How do you know all this 1
Singh, ‘You are a Muslim.’
an lam a fakir of Nanak.
believe in the teachings of Guru

my family. When Nanak visited this place my

took this rock from him, which has his hand print. For gener
tock has been with us. It 1s oUF with Guru Nanais
. nes we hid it

W ;
¢ have been taking good care of !

asked Hari

b]
nformation about our Guru?

tee. ] may be a Muslim but I
is rock has been

met him and
ations this

I am his devo
Nanak. For year th

ancestors

d connection

Mughal tir



be
tw
Ga

WALKING WITH NANAK

because we knew that those fanatic Muslims would have deste,
had they discovered it.’ eyed
‘Yes, those brute Turks had no respect for anyone’s religion,’ §
Hari Singh. yamed
“Today I present this rock to you, my King, for you are the savie
of this city, said Naju. mit
The fakir had everyone spellbound. He had sold the s
hand print on the rock belonged to Guru Nanak.
Asa roaming dervish Naju had heard that Guru Nanak had once
visited this place. There was a peepal tree on the outskirts of the city
where, according to local tradition, Guru Nanak was said to have stayed

tory that the

Z Stave
for a few days. Naju had never paid any attention to the story before ‘he
He did not even know who Guru Nanak was; he just had a vague ides
that the Sikhs of Punjab considered him to be their Prophet. Today as
he stood in front of Hari Singh, all those folk stories that had receded
to his subconscious came forward on their own. They then fed on the
fancy of this Muslim fakir’s imagination and took on a life of their own,
developing into religious truths.

Hari Singh and the others were convinced that this hand print
delonged to Guru Nanak. Hari Singh was the first one to place his
hand on the mark. He then excitedly turned towards his audience and
said, ‘Look. Look at this miracle. See how the hand of Nanak fits my
hand perfectly.’ He kissed the rock and took out a few gold coins from
his purse and placed them on the rock. After bowing before the rock he
moved away and allowed others to do the same.

Even while it was at the camp, the rock turned into a shrine. The
entire army of Muslims, Hindus and Sikhs gathered in front of the rock
and made offerings. Kirtan singers who were present within the camp
were asked to sing songs that were written and composed by Guru
Nanak. The conquest had become a pilgrimage. Prayers continued late
~ into the night.

In the morning, Hari Singh ordered Naju to take him to the spot
where Nanak had stayed. Walking around the city the fakir took them
to a spot only a little outside the city where there was a peepal tee.
_ Facing the tree was a mountain. Next to it was a flowing stream. It was

—


THE LEGEND 29
yt ue auras there Hari Singh could also see the
af gardens that had been constructed by Emperor Jahangir. He
4 ye 4 the rock to be placed there, under the tree, and for a shrine to be
“ o commemorate the spot where Nanak and Mardana had rested.
bul ‘Naju it was a miracle of the Guru that we met you, said Hari
singh ‘Had you also left the city like the other residents, we would
weve! have discovered the rock of Nanak and this shrine would never
> have been constructed. The entire Sikh community owes you immensely.
believe that God himself had kept you back to take care of this rock
ind inform us about it. Naju stood silently listening to this praise. He
yore an expression of piousness. ‘You told me that the story of this rock

’ associated with the story of a Muslim shrine nearby. Where exactly

_ jsit? Take us there.’

98

~ Anam, Iqbal Qaiser and I started to climb the steep stairs which seemed
to be leading us into a housing settlement. I stopped to marvel at the
beauty of the sight. This was a beautiful climb, with houses flanking
the stairs that take one up the mountain. There was a small stall selling
religious paraphernalia, which included not only pieces of cloth with
Quranic inscriptions but also alm and other material that one associates
with Shia Islam.
Js the shrine a Shia shrine or a Sunni shrine?’ ] asked Iqbal Qaiser.
This was a relevant question. Only a few days ago, on the tenth day of
Muharram, when Shia processions are taken out all over the world,
ots had erupted in the garrison city of Rawalpindi. A state of curfew
had been imposed for two days. Rawalpindi happens to be the twin city
of Islamabad, the federal capital of the country. The Shia-Sunni divide
has increased in the last two decades, particularly in the urban areas of
P akistan, It was in this backdrop that I wanted to find out about the
shr ne we were attempting to get to at the top of the mountain.

I don't know,’ said Iqbal Qaiser.

Perhaps the premise of the question was wrong fo begin with.
© distinction between Shia and Sunni did not really apply in the


WW yo An have hi ha be om

40 WALKING WETH NANAK

conventional sense at auch Sufi shrines. | lere

the different sects of Islan are blurred. Hetore Hartition this |

, ‘ 1 tity

been true tor Elindus, Mustinws and Sikhs as well. As we as hy
, RSET

mountun the pach emerged out ot the hotes ain

hie boundariog |

f
le| th
Mili i
Wel yy the hi

Nanak li

| wlio lie
Vacant mountain, We could see the shire of Wah Oundh

Below was the shrine of Panja Sahib dedicated to ¢ ira
Partition days Muslin niust have vieited the shrine af Nana
Ne e b ss
Sikhs and Plindus would have hid ne qualinn about visitin

shrine on top of this mountain, which happened to be
in the region.

Ny
pre
While
the Muslin

the tallest peak

there were several other pilgrims climbing with us, Most of they
ni
Were school and college students, bunking claien to Vinit the

t,
Sere an
shrine, This was not merely for religious reasons but

lie fi Hol
Most of them carried their mobile phones, out of whi

devotional music emerged, | noticed a disearded hewapaper on the way
with a picture of Jinnah. Hlow mueh was he responsible toy

al CHE
h the sounds rn

iuich sharp
distinctions between ditlerent relipious groups and sects? Partition

alter
all aggravated the problem, But then was Jinnah solely responsible for
Partition? One needs to also take into account the role of the British
in stratifying a society on the basis of different reliyious group that
eventually led to such distinet religious identities,

Walking up this steep slope with my wife by my side and Iqbal Quiver
a few steps behind us, | tried imagining what the situation of religious
divisions must have been at the time of Nanak. Nationalist historians on
the side of Pakistan point out that a religious divide existed throughout
history, while those on the Indian side point out that it was actually the
British who exacerbated the problem. But then if one focuses on Nanak
struggle, his entire movement was for the blurring of the religious divide:
‘This means that different religious identities must have been present
even in his time and must have been quite a social problem, for him to
talk about it so much.

‘There were several devotees who were now coming, down the
mountain, These too were mostly young men, | noticed a few cary”?

a : ' ‘ ‘ " ' ‘ 19 pilprimape
their slippers in their hands, with the intention of making this pig
dithcult for themselves.

ing?

PE AWep,,



SMW sikhbook cist cope

iin TD

THE LEGEND
ZS
They've made the path much easier now. vid late! Cy:

_, with us while we > said Iqbal Qaiser, a8 he
aught UP wi stopped to take a short break. We w
severly out of breath after climbing for about thirty minutes bs Pal
ihe WAY ysed to gO around the mountain and there we - sesies te
here are now. On several occasions one had to lie down on the ore ae

d crawl Up under a huge rock that was in the way.’ wee
Iqbal Qaiser’s remar. k made me realise the similarities of this Muslim
iIgrimmage to that of several Hindu ones to the shrines of deities on the
‘op of mountains. In all religious traditions, mountain tops have had
jcular spiritual significance. Prophet Muhammad ( PBUH used tes
climb to the cave of Hira for a spiritual retreat and it was there that the
yran was first revealed to him. Prophet Moses talked to God on top
af Mount Sinai. One of the most important sermons of Jesus Christ was
jJso on top of a mount. This goes back to the concept that one is closer
to God when one is at a higher point. Several Hindu jogis and Mushim
found refuge on top of a mountain away from civilization.
] felt a strange sensation of power.
The entire world was in front of me, busy in its activities, which seemed
so trivial from up here. Perhaps the concept of observing the world from
the top is not about getting closer to God but rather getting closer to

being like God.

There was a s
there were shops and restaurants for p
dimbing with soft drinks and other snac
they reached the top of the mount.

This was a particularly rocky mountain with a few lone trees on the
way. On the branches of these trees devotees had tied small pieces of
colourful cloths as supplication. ‘Allah O Akbar’ was written on Severs
barren rocks on the way This perhaps was done to establish that this
Space was now Muslim. ] find this phenomenon to be more prevalent in
places where there is a contested history, like in Sialkot, where there used

b is in the plain

to be a maior Sikh shrine. The Gurdwara of Panja Sahi
Or shrine. ine eof vile
below us, During the occasion of Baisakhi when thousands of pilgrims

descend upon this shrine, several also rravel up to this Muslim shrine.

'S message is for them.

Sufis have also
Sitting here on this mountain,

mall clearing almost halfway up the mountain. Here
ilgrims. Several pilgrims were
ks that they would eat once



Ba eth att

_www.sikhbookclub.com,
242 WALKING WITH NANAK

At the top of the mountain we were greeted by a wooden &
that marks the entrance to the sacred space. The modest shrine of Wat
Qandhari was surrounded by a protective wall outside where there ali
a few more shops selling religious items. It took us about ninety ia
to get here. We rested for several minutes before continuing on as

. } ro , . . INto
the shrine. Most of the shopkeepers imagined us to be Indian pilgrim
because of the way we were dressed. All of us were wearing jeans, whi
the other pilgrims were wearing shalwar kameez. The shopkeepers tie
luring us into buying ethnic items since they thought we were foreigners

There was a strong commercial enterprise in the vicinity of the shrine.
An old man who was sitting in front of the building quickly gathered
the shoes of the pilgrims, when they took them off before entering.
He then charged them money to take care of the shoes. Next to hima
dervish was sitting on a stall selling sacred water that he kept in earthen
pots to the pilgrims.

Before the invention of pumps, devotees considered it their religious
duty to carry water pots to the top of mountains when visiting a shrine.
This was because there was no other mechanism for bringing water up
there. The water would then be served to thirsty pilgrims as a religious
service. After the invention of pumps there was no need for this religious
activity but several devotees continue to do it as the remnant of a tradition.
Since this water is brought as a gift by the devotee to the saint, it is
considered blessed. In these days of pumps, the dervish here sold the
water back to the pilgrims in the name of religious duty.

_ I walked into an empty lot next to the shrine. I saw a few dervishes
smoking hashish while hiding behind a grove of trees. On top of the
mountain, secluded from the world, I could understand why junkies
would start living here and become dervish.’”” There was a small courtyard
facing the shrine. Inside the shrine the grave of the saint was missing:
_ There was a green box in the middle which read that it has been place
- there by the Augqaf Department and that devotees should put the
offerings and money in it. ;
 Onone of the walls I noticed that all the festival dates of this shan

Dervish are Sufi ascetics


“Ste sikhbookclub.com,

THE LEGEND

243

; put up. It recorded Baisakhi as we
had bee! the shrine of Guru Nanak at the bottom of the Mountain. This
festival i he story of these two shrines is linked,

is pecas® “pout fifteen minutes, we decided to he
; ae abd. However, before we started to ¢lj
Hass!"

ll. This coincides with the

ad back to the city of
mb down we stopped

ance for a few minutes and tried to
of the story that linked this shrine to that of Guru Nanak
-e sense . ‘

make §

bottom. The grand Gurdwara of Panja Sahib could be seen in
> iC . ‘
at the

) the wooden frame at the entr
oxf fe
next

front of “ ~a rock was thrown from here, how could it possibly reach
eyen.s ot, id Iqbal Qaiser. “There are several hurdles on the way.’

the Blog . vet is that if a rock was thrown, why couldn't Nan
" oe away’ from its trajectory? Why did he need to Stop twit

simply ie as a small rock, anyway.’ adde si a hat

his hand? It was s, Anam was a bit confused. She didn’t know wha
Standing new “Wak Qandhari and the rock was. Finally, after on

rl ° me done with our analysis, she asked us, ‘How is this
iser and | w ,

re connected to Guru Nanak?

98

° dana on the
long with Mar pm tne
‘tion, Nanak arrived here a ‘val of Baisakht
mies Wh Ie bee of this that every year the festival of
just of Baisakh.

he
: Jorims from all over t
lebrated at the Gurdwara Panja Sahib where pil ft

is celebrated a grt

ich is where the
/ tree which 1s
Oia th of water
e and sat un suai mostocte
world gather. So they cam

hirs. . There . . ture.
stands. Mardana then feltt . according to Sikh litera ;
gurdwara now I! at least, there wasnt, alised that there was
here like there is now. ve ag bit miraculous powers Te
Now Guru Nanak usin

rmit living there
h e Was a he
; top ofa mount and that ther
e of fr Sf water on

of 1 a 7 .

where he saw
ed the top /
and get water from OT ap mountain and pene sitting next (0.0 D
; the sté abe : aveller,
Mardana climbed edicted. There unas that he was a tired tr ink
“actly what Nanak had pr ater and thinking rdana was about 10
W
jf water. Mardana ashe é water, Just when Ma
the hermit agreed to give


www.sikhbookclub.com,

THE PROPHECY

Brahma was left with no other option but to interfere. He sent down
lightning from the sky, which hit the goddess and she fell. The world
had been saved but a giant mound had been created, with thriving cities
and villages buried beneath it and on top of it, placed like a crown was
the rock with the mark of her feet. Then as a reward for her devotion
to him, Brahma told her that the mound she had created would forever
serve as a warning to humans of what would happen to them if they
didn't follow the path of truth; while as a reminder of the ferociousness
of gods and goddesses, the rock with the mark of her feet would become
sacred. Pilgrims and devotees would come here till the end of the world
and would be granted their wishes. The rock, which was gigantic at that
time, would shrink with age, and the day it ceases to be, the world would
also come to an end.’

‘The end is not very far then,’ said Tripta. “The rock is already so
small. How much longer do you think it will last?’

‘I don't know.’

‘Tell me something, fakir. How do you know that my wish will come
true?”

‘Because you are a true devotee with conviction. Had you stopped the
recitation of the mantra to cast me away, the goddess would have been
upset with you. Had you stopped the recitation to give me some money
she would still not have been pleased. You continued the recitation while
also responding to me, which is the perfect state of being—a delicate
balance between spirituality and worldliness. A true believer walks this
middle path. That is the message of my Prophet, peace be upon him
(PBUH), and also of this temple. You have the traits of a true devotee
and a true devotee never returns empty-handed from the house of God.’

A year after her trip to the shrine, Tripta prepared to undertake
another journey. This time she agreed to be taken in a palanquin while
a group of servants and guards travelled with her. Five months after her
meeting with the fakir she had become pregnant. She believed that it
was due to the intercession of the fakir that Kali Mata had bestowed her
with this blessing. After her first visit to the shrine she visited it twice but
never found the fakir again. When she asked the pandit about him, he

snobbishly ignored the question and made offensive remarks about low-


www.sikhbookclub.com|

244 WALKING WITH NANAK
the hermit asked him who was he and where he was from. Mardang , al
him that he was a devotee of Guru Nanak, a saint who was close tp 5 ,
Wali Qandhari felt jealous of Guru Nanak and said that if this may Gun
Nanak was such a big saint then he should arrange for water for his dey te
himself. In this way Mardana was sent down the mountain without h aving
quenched his thirst.

At the base, Mardana told Nanak what had transpired. ‘Go back and ash
for water once again, ’ said Nanak. Huffing and puffing Mardana climbed the
mountain again and did as he was told. The Wali refused again.

When Mardana reached Nanak he was told that he should go back once
again and ask for the water in the name of God. When the Wali refused and
Mardana narrated the story to Nanak, he said, ‘Now that you have asked
for the water thrice in the name of God and he has refused, I will provide
you with water. ’ Saying this, he removed a stone from the ground and water
started to gush out of that spot.

Nanak had performed a miracle. All the water that was earlier with the
Wali disappeared as it came flowing down the mountain. This angered Wali
Qandhari and in his wrath he hurled a rock at Nanak and Mardana, which
Nanak stopped with his hand. The print of that hand remained on the rock
that Nanak stopped.

This is yet another story in which Nanak is depicted as competing with a
Muslim saint, where Nanak overcomes him with his powers. This 1s used to
drive home the claim that our’ saint is stronger than ‘your’ saint. You should
read Salman Rashid’s book The Salt Range and the Potohar Plateau. Jn
that book he argues that this pool of water next to the gurdwara has been here

for thousands of years and that it was considered sacred even in the Buddhist
era. The Chinese traveller Hiuen Tsang, in the 7th century CE, 1s reported t0
have travelled here and observed that this was a sacred lake.

According to this testimony the lake has been considered sacred for
thousands of years. It was believed that people's diseases would be cured after
taking a dip in it. After a gurdwara was built here during the tenure 4
Maharaja Ranjit Singh, this sacred pool of water remained sacred but bf
given a different iconography this time, based on the miracles of Guru Nandt-
One also sees this happening in several Muslim shrines where Hindu te
have been converted into Muslim shrines after Partition.

mples


www.sikhbookclub.com
Sine nearer ne etcetera sate ewe

THE LEGEND
245

98

4 ahead of me was an old man in his sixti
° + of his saffron headscarf. Bee vat bile anles ma
“othing be gi. He placed his hand at the hand mark betieved to be
sat of Nanak. Ag is the specialty of this rock, his hand too fit the hand
“Nanak perfectly. Miracle! Then he placed a ten rupee note on top of
d it. He then took some water from the pool around

the rock and kisse
ed it on the rock and then cleaned it with his aes

the rock and pour
There was 4 line of devotees behind him, all of whom were urging him

move On. He was taking too much time. He moved on and now it

to

was mY turn.

Before | could place my hand on the handprint and also become

miracle, mysterious hands emerged from the windows
from but | could

k. I tried to see where they were coming

not because of the darkness inside. Women were shouting behind these
dark spaces. There was an urgency in trying to touch this holy rock and
seek its blessing. These women too placed money oP top of the rock after
seeking the blessings of the rock by touching it.
In time, | placed my hand on the handprint of Nanak, at that moment
genuinely believing in the story that this was Nanak’s hand. I knew that
‘twasn't. 1 knew this was 4 fictitious story dreamed up by a man called
Naju the fakir to save his life, hiselled by a man
called Kamma. But such is the pow ion in religion that I

forgot all my rationality and believed that | was touching Nanak’s hand.
That was the closest I hav

e ever felt to Nanak.
The gurdwara that was built here by Maharaja Ranjit Singh in the
nineteenth century was behind me, while the shrine © Wali Qandhart
on top of the mountain was right in

front. This was the occasion of
isakhi i sands of
Baisakhi and the festival was only be thou
all here t° comme

engaged in this
flanking the roc

“aning. Lhere were
morate the formation of

Sikh pilgrims around me,
the Khalsa.



_www.sikhbookclub.com,

19
GURU RAM DAS

When Guru Amar Das’s wife recommended the young man Jetha
with their younger daughter Bibi Bhani, one of the first
Guru asked Jetha was about his caste. P. S. Grewal in his
Doctrine and the Feudalization of the Sikh Gurudom’
s relieved when he heard that the man to be
Sodhi Khatri, an ancient caste of kings.”

for marriage
questions the
article ‘Nanak’s
suggests that the Guru wa

married to his daughter was a
Amar Das himself belonged to the Khatri Bhalla caste, a high caste on

its own, according to the societal norms of the time. The marriage took
place and in this way Jetha, the future Guru Ram Das, was initiated into
the family of the Guru.

Atthe time Guru Amar Das was based at Goindwal, which was also
where Jetha lived, serving the Guru and the Sikh community. Jetha’s
parents had died at a young age, because of which he was raised by his
grandmother. As a young child he sold boiled grain and wheat in the
village of Basarke near Amritsar where he was first spotted by Amat
Das, who at that time was not yet a Guru but a devotee of Guru Angad

Dev, the successor of Guru Nanak. Amar Das had a deep impact 0” the
young boy who soon after followed him to Khadur, where Amar Das
lived, serving Guru Angad Dev. Jetha too spent his time looking after
the langar at the darbar of the Guru and serving the Sikh community.

“Grewal, Nanak’s Doctrine, page 29


Stew sikhbookclub. com

GURU RAM Das

24}

Soon after igs the mantle of Guruhood was passed onto Amar Dz
_ moved 10 Goindwal and Jetha followed him, a’,
At Goindwal, Jetha served his father-in-law with devotion. His
miily members would often complain about his servile attinude - ‘
_ «Jaws but he never heeded their complaints. His w; — towards
his in / plaints. His wife, Bibi Bhani
100 served her father and the Guru with immense devotion. In the
| ikh tradition, an Important incident is attributed to her. Once when
~ Guru Amar Das was performing his ablutions sitting on a stool, one of
the legs of the stool broke. Immediately Bibi Bhani put her own foot
ynder the stool to prevent the Guru from falling. Her father noticed
that it was his daughter's leg that was protecting him from falling when
he saw her blood mixing in the water. Impressed by the dedication of
his daughter, he asked her what she wished from her father. What Bibi
Bhani asked for changed the course of Sikh history. She requested for
the institution of Guruhood to become hereditary.”* The Guru warned
her of the consequences, telling her that this promise would bring much
pain and suffering. The Sikh tradition notes that he was referring to the
assassination of Guru Arjan, the incarceration of Guru Hargobind, the
martyrdom of Guru Tegh Bahadur and that of Guru Teg Bahadur’s
grandsons (Guru Gobind Singh’s sons), all of whom were the descendants
of Guru Amar Das.
Prior to Guru Amar Das the institution of Guruhood had bypassed
the progeny of former Gurus and was bestowed upon the most devoted
student. Guru Nanak preferred Angad Dev over his son Sri Chand,
while Angad Dev preferred Amar Das over his son Dasu. This was fo
change with the appointment of Guru Ram Das, the son-in-law of
Guru Amar Das. After Ram Das, the succession of Guruhood became

a family affair in which the son of the Guru was preferred over others.
Ram Das appointed his son, Arjan. Arjan appointed his son, Hargopine.
Har Rai. Har Rai appo

fa

inted his son,

Hargobind appointed hi

ppointed his grandson, had
Harkrishan. Harkrishan appointed his grandunc® psn 5 3 Rai i
SO; - * d is son, Odi
he eObind. Tegh Bahadus i that the Adi Granth would be

Gobind Singh). Gobind Singh decreed t

=o
Singh, The History of Sikh Gurus, page 50


248 WALKING WETH HANA

| Guru as opposed to appointing an appointing ati inden,
7 NEG,

the Eterna
after he saw the death of all of his sons during his lifetime. (Winn,
Fred Ty

Guruship remained within the family, the eldest son was somes,
bypassed as in the case of Guru Arjan and Guru Harkrishani, why ip
; IAL L

younger sons.)
Guru Ram Das became the
mantle of Guruhood reached Gobind Singh it was understoad 4
& thigs

the institution of Guruhood would only be passed Onte sorneone bron.
the Sodhi caste. Gobind Singh wrote various verses extolling the mers
] ad FCB EES

and its ancient history. At the time of appointing 4 success,

of his caste
to the institution of Guruhood it is believed that Guru Amar Das ow
and his two sons through a few tests to prove tr

as the right one. All Sikhs ALE

first Sodhi Guru, By the time 4
: pf

his two sons-in-law
everyone that his choice of Ram Das w
made by Guru Amar Das, except his eldest son Mohar
Ram Das moved to Karndaspur, z
e land that was gifted to his
1 he met Guru Amar Das
e Amrit Sar. In order to

2] <4
i O5

the choice
Keeping in mind his opposition,
small town that he had founded on th
wife by the Mughal Emperor Akbar wher
Here the Guru started the construction of th
fund the construction of the tank, the Guru introduced the syste

Masand.

At the time of appointing the next Guru after Ram Das, 4 conic
arose between the Guru's two sons, Prithi Chand and Arjan. Sixt
tradition finds the root of the conflict to be Arjan’s trip to Lahore anc
the machinations of Prithi Chand; however, one also needs to bear ix
mind the issue of property here. When the mantle of Guruhoos wa
being passed to Arjan, Ram Das’ immense property, which was essenti2i}
the entire city of Ramdaspur and the area around it, was also being
assed onto him. Immediately after the appointment of Arjan, Pritt
‘Chand approached Mughal authorities to get him his rightful share *
the property of his father and hence began the tumultuous relations?
between the Mughals and the Sikhs. ;
Therefore, while analysing the appointment of Guru Ram Da -

the next Guru of the Sikh community one also needs to be bear®
mind that with this event also begins the process of feudalisation # . °
Guruhood. All subsequent Gurus after Ram Das were huge landown"

—» *


gam Das also encouraged horse ie! adic
in words a Pp S. Crm Cada tee , is < i. ug
peivilere. ‘which explains the he bedi en a profit,



20
RELIGIO- COMMERCIALISATION

The boundary between Sindh and Punjab becomes a blur as we drive
through Bahawalpur, heading towards our destination at Uch Sharif
According to Sikh tradition, Nanak was invited here by the saint Syed
Jalaludin Surkh Posh Bokhari when he met him in Kandahar, on the
way back from Haj.

This is where the cultures of Punjab and Sindh merge. Some of the
roadside hotels are called Punjab Hotel, while others are Sindh Hotel.
The language here, referred to as Siraiki, is also an amalgamation of the
two languages. | cannot understand a word of it, even though I consider
myself a Punjabi.
| ‘Their Siraiki is different from that in Multan,’I said to Iqbal Qaiser
_ “The Siraiki spoken in Multan is closer to Punjabi, while here it is more
- like Sindhi.’ Iqbal Qaiser seemed to have no difficultly in communicating
~ in this language as he asked for directions from the people on the way:

We drove through the town of Uch Sharif and headed towards the
shrine of Hazrat Makhdoom Syed Hamid Ganj Bakhsh Gilani. We wore
ascending a mound and the streets around us were getting narrower. [his
was the older part of the city. There were massive havelis around us, those
of the current caretakers of the shrine, the Gilanis and the Makhdooms-
We parked in front of one such haveli and headed towards the shrine.

Passing through a small gateway, another old structure that had
remained intact, we entered a small market, the likes of which are foun


“ww. sikhbookclub.com

RELIGIO“COMMERCIALISATION
25]

ext 10 all Sufi shrines and temples, Religious paraphernalia was being
“it cred thread, pictures of saints, religious books on Shiaism and
jevotional songs. There were posters of Lal Shahbaz Qalandar, Baba
parid, Pir Jalaludin and Bahauddin Zakariya. | looked at them hoping
ro see a poster of Guru Nanak too. He is after all as important a saint as
inv ot these people, but there was none, It is strange that once Nanak had
heen invited to visit this place at the behest of the saint himself but today
shere is no trace of his heritage. To accept Guru Nanak as one of their
own would be too much to ask in these days of heightened religiosity.

The southern region of Punjab, where Uch Sharif lies, has more
traces of religious and cultural syncretism compared to the northern
and central region, where there is a greater prevalence of education and
hence religious intolerance.

There is a misconception that lack of education breeds religious
intolerance and that education exorcises all such demons. In fact the
case in Pakistan seems to be the opposite. This is because education here
is closely connected with the nationalistic agenda. One of the stated
purposes of education in Pakistan is to promote nationalism among
children. It is for this reason that the mainstream education here is
diluted by nationalistic propaganda and hence, by association, religious
propaganda. One would find references to ‘Pakistani’ and ‘Islamic’ heroes
like Muhammad Ali Jinnah, Allama Iqbal, Sir Syed Ahmad Khan,
Muhammad Bin Qasim, Mahmud Ghaznvi and Ahmad Shah Abdali
in curriculums as unrelated as those of Chemistry, Geography and Urdu.
It is then easy to understand why such an educational Process breeds
chauvinistic nationalistic traits. With a strong sense of nationalism comes
a strong sense of ‘otherization,, a demonization of those who are not part
of us—us' being Pakistani, Muslim, and in particular Sunni Muslim.

With education there is also a tendency to look down apart religious
Practices like visiting Sufi shrines and bowing down in front of a grave or
a living saint. Such superstitious tendencies within Islam are no longer
acceptable to the educated elite and middle class, who seem to preter
an individualistic and lite
Hindu practices with Sufi Isla
class, as it searches for a purer vers

ralistic interpretation of Islam. The mixing of
m is no longer acceptable to the educated
ion of religion. Hence over the years



LE RAO

www.sikhbookclub.com,

eerie

252 WALKING WITH NANAK
Sufi shrines have lost their significance amongst the educated clas, ang
urban centres and remain attractive only to the rural and ‘uneducate .
who can still tolerate religious syncretism along with the dilution of
identity in accepting a Hindu past.

The shrine is situated next to a fifteenth century structure, wher.
the grave of Moosa Pak Shaheed once existed. It’s unclear who he was
According to a board next to the structure, put up by the Departmen
of Archaeology, his body was later shifted to Multan. The building Was
octagonal, constructed in typical Multani fashion with blue tiles, Ip 4
dilapidated condition now, it must have been a beautiful building once,

It turns out that we were visiting the shrine at the time of the urs
celebration which explained the rush in the market and the throngs of
visitors, pushing us aside to pass through. There was a metal detector
gate at the entrance, next to which a bored policeman sat. Shrines of
Sufi saints, where devotees offer chadars and revere the graves, often
bowing in front of them, are considered un-Islamic by the puritanical
sects of Islam. In recent years as a wave of Islamic purism has spread
over Pakistan due to the influence of the Taliban, such shrines have come
under attack. There have been attacks on many such shrines, including
Data Ganj Baksh in Lahore, Baba Farid’s at Pakpattan and Abdullah
Shah Ghazi’s in Karachi.

Inside, Iqbal Qaiser busied himself photographing the shrine while |
sat in one corner observing people and making notes in my diary. Nanak
visited Uch Sharif on his way to Sindh, towards the end of his travels,
after he had already visited the East, South, North and West. He had
now settled at Kartarpur in Punjab and would travel occasionally to
neighbouring areas. The visit to Uch Sharif was after he had settled down.

Sitting here, I wondered if Nanak understood the language spoke"
around him, with which I was struggling, while he was here. But then
there is a difference in the way he travelled and the way we travel. For
him, the transitions of language and culture must have been a g™ Be
process, allowing him time to acquaint himself with new words an
of grammar. In these days of modern travel, that is not possible. 1
noe, " moder cist Nanak incorporated several words Ki i.
: part of the Punjabi of the time. As he travelled, he picke


va

Se Srl a ee Sa wh met le a eae! 2 tilts aes IE

se an cata et NA te ne lesan anharaeb at rit

RELIGIO-COMMERCIALISATION

253

words from different ae and we Can see an influence of that in his
re This helped develop the Punjabi language, which is why Nanak’s
contribution as @ poet to Punjabi is immense.
| entered the shrine where the graves of all the saints were located
A man standing next to the gr aye of the saint asked me to put in some
noney into a green box next to it, which would then go to the caretakers
ofthe shrine, helping them expand their houses and buy bigger cars. ]
ignored him and moved on. This was a small graveyard within a large
;oom. Generations of saints from a single family were buried here. Those
who dominate this city, economically, politically and socially, feeding off
the charity of devotees, will also be buried here after they die. At one
end of the room, there was a grave which was covered by a purdah (veil
or screen).

‘Whose grave is that?’ I asked the man who had asked me to put my
contribution into the green box. “That is a female relative of the saint, he
told me. That explained the veil. ‘If you give me fifty rupees, I can show
you all the graves,’ he offered.

Jam the product of a post-9/11 world. My understanding of politics,
religion and culture has all been shaped by this event. Therefore my
perception of Islam is also in a way a direct product of this world. In
fact, am not the only one who has had to grapple with this new version
of Islam. This phenomenon affects my entire generation. Being neutral
was no longer possible as was stated by George Bush immediately after
the attacks. Over the years I have seen my friends and colleagues neatly
choose either of two sides. They were binary opposites and the difference
between them was stark, yet to me they appear as two sides of the same
coin. One side was that of the Islamic fundamentalist, those who were
Taliban apologists and critical of the ‘secularisation of Pakistan. For them
everything that is part of the world is either Islamic or un-Islamic. All
around me I saw members of my generation tilt towards that position.

And then there was the other extreme. For them, anyone religious
Was a lesser being, a symbol ofa partially evolved human. Anything that
came out of the mouth of the ‘religio-fundoo was Dah wos ; istening
to and hence had to be shunned. There could be no debate - discussion
With the other side. For them there was only one hope for Pakistan—to

become less religious.



\

NW w.sikhbookclub.com

)
1¢ WALKING WITH NANAK

caste, meat-eating Muslims. However, the vendors around the tem |
were aware of the fakir, whom they called Naulakha Hazari. She '
told that he was a Muslim fakir who visited the temple regularly. A i
the entre work belonged to Allah and none ad ay ghee
var e g ah and no one had any right to banish
um from anywhere.

The fakir spoke kindly to the pilgrims and vendors and so over the
tn pant decided saint chasnghin away fcing tare ele ha

andi ‘ sing him away, fearing that it might have a
negative impact on his reputation as a man of religion. In reality though,
he hated the Muslim fakir whom he considered an untouchable and
wished that he would disappear forever.

Naulakha Hazari would often be sighted sitting inside one of the
stone rooms, lost in mediation like other yogis and jogis. Sometimes, he
would sit like a beggar on the temple stairs, counting on the generosity
of pilgrims. But his favourite spot was the acacia tree on the summit
of the mound, next to the temple. Here, he would sometimes spend
days lost in his inner world without a care for food or water. Often,
wandering goats would gather around, eating up the food that devotees
would place next to him while he was in a meditative state. Tripta was
told that he was particularly fond of goats and often served them food
and water. ‘Love animals even before you love your neighbours,’ people
had heard him say more than once. Sometimes the fakir would disappear
for months. No one knew where he went or when he would be back.
When he returned, he would tell no one about his journeys and spend

most of his time in mediation.
Upon returning from the temp]

the interaction with the fakir. Mehta

by the discussion. There was a visible

had accumulated on her visage over t
Even though he did not pay much attention to the fakir’s prediction, he

was glad to see his wife in a positive frame of mind. He started coming
back early from work to spend more time with her. This added to Triptas
happiness. She started regarding this too as a miracle wrought by the fakir.
The fakir’s prediction had bridged the distance between the young couple.

e, Tripta had told her husband about
Kalu could see that she was inspired
change in her. The worries which
he past few years now vanished.


www.sikhbookclub.com,

254 WALKING WITH NANAK

I was inclined towards the second side. But o
become disillusioned with them as well. ‘They were
former and as closed to new ideas. I realised that
traditions within Islam that weren't necessarily violent but + ‘
syncretic. I discovered that Islam too had a glorious past of intelle. er
freedom and creativity, when it had been acceptable for a scholar to -
any kind of question. This was the past of Rumi, Umer Khayyam .
e-Arabi and Ibn-e-Rushd. o_—

I also felt particularly sympathetic towards the
important aspect of Islam in South Asia. This for mer
syncretism and a greater tolerance towards the ‘other’. I felt as if in thi.
growing environment of religious fundamentalism, this version of Islarn
could pave the way for the middle way. Yet sitting at this shrine and
looking at how innocent people are robbed of their hard-earned money
I felt derision towards the shrine culture like I had never felt before,

In his poetry Nanak spoke vehemently against religious exploitation
of this kind. For example, he says:

ver the year
as intolerant as th

€
there were several

ST hag

shrine culture, a,
epresented religions

His goodness cannot be priced or traded,
Nor His worshippers valued, nor their store;
Priceless too are dealers in the market sacred
With love and peace evermore.”

‘This could well be a criticism of the commercialisation of religion which
was running rampant in this shrine. We find in his poems a disdain lor
priests and Sufi pirs who manipulate the people for their own economic
benefit. Throughout Nanak’s philosophy one finds a strong concept
of individualism, of discovering the self. Nanak talks about removing
intermediaries and establishing a direct connect with God. ~
As much as felt disgusted by religious exploitation I could not phe
myself to hate it as much as Nanak did. Thinking as an anthropolog
believe that such rituals and religious shrines play an important role a
society, giving a source of identity to a community. | also do not be en
in the concept of a right path towards the divine. I believe that eve”

ren ene


omtt:SIKNbookclub.com

“ELIGIO-COMMERCIALISAT on

finds miei? hii depending on their conditions. If coming to a shrj
ynd touching the chadar covering the grave of a saint mm % to a shrine
to God for someone, then that is th “as

allowing everyone to follow their own 7
would have perhaps disagreed with my

tolerance towards suc i
, ‘P s such shrines.
Let’s visit the shrine of Bib; ;

| Jiwindi,’ said Iqbal Qaiser, We walked
through the market, heading towards this group of thirteenth and

fourteenth century shrines. After a little while we found ourselves in an
open field with a few houses in front of us,

‘This place has changed since the last time ] came here,’ said Iqbal
Qaiser.'One could see the shrines from here,’ He asked a man standing
nearby about the shrines who told us that we would have to take a car
to reach them.

We drove around the city. These shrines were on the outskirts,
situated on top of a mound, which was being used as a graveyard. Half
the structures of the shrine had been razed and were protected by iron
rods. Whatever remained though was beautiful, made out of glazed
Multani tiles, coloured in blue and white. There was a white dome on
top, which shone in the sun like a broken eggshell.

‘There was a huge flood here in the sixteenth century and these
buildings were destroyed at that time,’ said Iqbal Qaiser. River Sutlej, the
lost river of Pakistan, used to flow from here before it was lost forever
after the Indus Water Treaty was signed between India and Pakistan in
1960. After the Indus Water Treaty, the rivers of Punjab were divided
ivers—Indus, Jhelum and Chenab, and
into two parts—three Western zs . ven full rights
three Eastern rivers—Ravi, Sutlej and meas pn ws | ad l he d
over using the waters of the Eastern rivers or i‘ aerien ions nes :
before these rivers entered Pakistan! territory, whe i dia constracted
tights over the Western rivers. Over the yeien 08 ins = oe an
dams and reservoirs over their rivers, the ow . one wat § a

aan mighty Ravi of history flows ike a stream:
diminishing. Now the mign'y) ers have completely disappeared. Only
Lahore, while the other two me when there is an overflow does some
occasionally during ne saree Pakistan, flooding the region around
water from the Sutlej flow 1° he year, it isa dry bank. Nanak must have
Kasi Os erwise, throughout the year,


‘www.sikhbookclub.com,

WALKING WITH NANAK

256

seen these buildings intact with a mighty river flowing next to it. How

beautiful they must have been!
The shrine of Pir Jalaludin Bokhari was also situated on this mound

It was protected by a thick wall with barbed wire on top, which was
constructed recently to protect it from terrorist attacks. Almost all the

visitors here, who numbered in the hundreds, were heading towards

this shrine.
We too ascended the stairs and entered the complex. There was an

old Banyan tree in the centre. Behind us was a banner on the wall which

depicted Pir Jalaludin, Bahauddin Zakariya, Baba Farid and Lal Shahbaz

Qalandar. Once again there was no Nanak.
It was strange for me that all these saints were depicted on one banner

as if they represented a continuous strand of religious tradition. The truth
is that all of them belonged to different schools of thought. For example,
Bahauddin Zakariya who is now considered the patron saint of Multan
rose to importance because of his association with the rulers in Delhi.
He had a madrassa in Multan, where he is now buried. Here he would
teach the children of the local Nawab and other important officials. It
was an elite school of its era.

On the other hand, Baba Farid moved from Delhi to Pakpattan
because he did not want to associate with the rulers there. His madrassa
was similar to poorly funded public schools, where the students could
not even afford a proper meal.

On closer observation one can pick up these differences betwee
_ saints in their pictures. Bahaudin Zakariya is dressed like a rich man, with

pearls around his neck and a fancy gown, while Baba Farid is depicted
ina simple white dress with a green shawl on his shoulders. In contrast

_ to both of them, Baba Lal Shahbaz Qalandar belonged to the school of

- thought of Malamti Sufis, who do riot believe in any form of organise
religion and consider themselves to be beyond the pale of any religious
> law, Both Bahaudin and Farid would have had serious differences wit

_ Lal Shahbaz Qalandar of Sehwan Sharif.

_I was walking alone in the courtyard, trying to notice everything |

- could, when the voice of a man asked me, “Where are you from, son?
ee ‘Lahore,'] said, even though I now live in Islamabad.

nthe


www.sikhbookclub.com

RELIGIO-COM MERCIALISATION

‘Are you alone?

No. 1 have a friend along.’

No.

‘Call him as well. I want to show you something.’

J don't think he will be interested. Why don’t you show it to me

.gstead?

Het

she same compound. This too was a historical building, as was apparent
som its architecture. It must have been constructed around the same
as the shrine. There were several men seated here. Women it seemed
not allowed as they looked on from the boundary. There were a few

ook me inside the mosque, which was next to the shrine within
bl]

ame
were

rooms on one side.
‘These are three rooms,’ he said. ‘In each one of these the three

aints have meditated: Baba Farid, Bahaudin Zakariya and Lal Shahbaz
Qalandar. I'll show them to you in a little while.’

| was not interested as I was sure that this was an apocryphal story.
He took me to one end of the mosque and picked up a green shawl with
Quranic verses on it. He placed it around my neck and then offered me

some water. ‘This will ensure that all your wishes come true.’
He would ask for a donation

I knew what was going to come next.
money. 1 took off the shawl

and I was in no mood to part with any
politely, handed it to him and walked off. He was perhaps in too much

of a shock to say anything.

Taking my shoes off, I walke f Pir Jalaludin Bokhari.

Women were not allowed here either. It was 4 dark r oom, with beautiful
wooden pillars holding up the roof. The pillars were pared carved
With floral designs, while the roof was decorated with co ev pavers

There were several graves here, of people who must 7 ae ; *
amounts of money to get bur sed next to the — : <a a saint
Was on a raised platform and enclosed a" ee Satie sound the
‘tanding next to it, touching the glass for : ster han with a green box
Slave and found myself face tO face ya a ind,’ I said and ontinued
‘Where are you from? he asked m¢- Never ie ‘nde as me and offered
Walking. The rest ot the devotees were not as

their d ‘ i
saint.
onations to the . uthor wh

Ayesha Siddiqa is 4 Pakista

dinto the shrine 0

o wrote Military I ncorporated,



www.sikhbookclub.com |
258 WALKING WITH NANAK

a courageous book that looks at the political and economic
of the institution of the Army in Pakistan. She belongs to Ba
which is only about seventy kilometres from here, | hav
Opportunity to interact with her a couple of times in confe
workshops. As a political scientist she is interested in Studying the
influence of puritanical Islamic organizations on Pakistani Society. She
points out that for the past few years, organisations like Jamat-ud-Daywa
and Laskhar-e-Jhangvi, who associate with the Ahl-e-Hadith school of
thought and don’t shy away from using violence, have seeped into the
social fabric of southern Punjab, a region that has historically rejected
such strands of Islam and adopted a syncretistic version of religion. Such
Sufi shrines are a symbol of that strand of Islam. However, according
to her, this is changing as such organisations are opening seminaries in
these rural areas and attracting unemployed youth towards them.

In a recent paper by Dr. Tahir Kamran, titled ‘Evolution and Impact
of “Deobandi” Islam in the Punjab’he also records a similar phenomenon.
In the paper, the historian has explained that such organisations are
becoming particularly popular with the youth of the region because
they offer an explanation for their current oppression. The first step of
their modus operandi is to target such shrines and their guardians, who
have become immensely rich feeding off the oppressed classes. Dr. Tahir
Kamran notes that in the absence of any Marxist or Liberal ideology,
the ideologies of these religious extremist organisations become the only
option for frustrated youth.

This phenomenon is best seen in Swat, where the Taliban took
over in 2009 and established their writ. More than religious salvation
the Taliban ideology presented the oppressed with a path to a political
revolution by revolting against the rulers of that region. Initially, the

cadres who were attracted to their movement were those who belonged
to the lower echelons of society.

Standing at this shrine and observing such blatant religious
oppression, it became clear to me why such extremist organisations we
becoming popular in this region. ] thought about Nanak’s oppositio?
to such practices once again and could not help but trace similarit®’
_ between his revulsion for such practices and those of these proscribe

influence
hawalpy t
€ had the

rences and


4

WWw. sikhi”
est, Wit thbookciyh e
Ra en M om

METIGION COMMUERCLALIBAT ION

2459

nat natn: doth wanted to liberate the
\ } 1
anteted helpless by thin feudal culture,

We walked out of the shrine and climbe

with afew other pilyrinis, There we

oppressed who are being

d the steep mound, along

re several graves on the mound, which

were covered arbitrarily with the blue and white Multani tiles that had
heen recovered from these historical shrines,

The first shrine that we came across was that of Baha-ul Halim and

iv date of construction was noted as the fourteenth century, According
w the board of the Archaeology Department, Baha-ul-Halirn was a
literary fyure and a teacher at the madrassa that used to run at the shrine
of Julaludin Surkh Posh Bokhari. This meant that this building was here
when Nanak visited this place sometime in the late fifteenth century. It
was now half broken and supported by iron rods.

‘The tomb next to this structure was that of Nauria and its date was
noted as the fifteenth century, Nauria is believed to be the architect of
the two adjoining buildings here, which he raised before his death. His
linal resting place was later constructed following the same architectural
tradition.

The last shrine on this mound was that of Bibi Jiwindi and it is
arguably the most important of these three buildings. According to the
board here, this tomb was built in 1494, so almost around the time that
Nanak came here and it belonged to the great granddaughter of Syed
Jalaludin Bokhari.

This came as a shoc
Jalaludin and Nanak were contemporaries, but if the shrine of his great
granddaughter was constructed at me time that Nanak was alive then

alaludin r ave lived much earlier. .
J sri ne pir Jiwindi died during the item Jalaludin
Bokhari,’ said Iqbal Qaiser, when | posed the are ” '. i. ad
to dismiss the Sikh version of the story immediately, lat fab io
that the tale of Nanak and Jalaludin meeting was " er Fcation
Nanak must have come here and perhaps paar ni dhe a . ; a -
of the saint but not J alaludin. Whee ue “ " ~ wet an oun
# hue Hae ‘ved in the thirteen century and died before the
out that Jalaludin had live

end of the century.

k to me. I had hereto assumed that Syed



www.sikhbookclub.com,
epee ee ETNA AEE NLT EMH at

260 WALKING WITH NANAK

A similar story of Nanak meeting Bahaudin Zakariya is also found
in Nanak’s hagiography. Once again one can dismiss this claim, if One
compares the time periods. Bahaudin too belonged to the thirteenth
century, almost a hundred years before Nanak. |

‘Do you want to see the well of Nanak?’ said Iqbal Qaiser a We
descended the mound. “There is nothing left there anyway.’

Iqbal Qaiser had already prepared me for this. He had told me thay
the last traces of Nanak’s legacy here had almost been destroyed and
therefore if that was what I was looking for then there was no point
travelling so far. But it was not Nanak’s legacy encapsulated in a building
that I was interested in. I wanted to see everything Nanak saw. I wanted
to travel in his footsteps. I wanted to find any trace of Nanak’s memory
at the shrine.

The well of Nanak was hidden within the field, shielded by a grove
of trees. It was abandoned and juice tetrapaks and wrappers were floating
in the black water. Next to it was a small mound which was covered in
grass. “This was the Gurdwara of Nanak,’ said Iqbal Qaiser.

Now nothing remained.

Did Nanak sit at this exact spot at a little distance from the shrine of
Jalaludin Surkh Posh Bokhari? Did he go inside? If he did, did he interact
with the pilgrims or caretakers, or did he, like me, observe everything
without talking to anyone, and once out, compose his beautiful verses?

‘Iqbal Sahib, how can I ever find out the real story of Nanak? We
know that he came to all these places but how can we find out what
really happened? The only evidence we have is found within the Sikh
religion and they are full of stories of miracles,’ I asked, as we drove back
to Lahore in the night.

‘Itis a difficult thing to do,’he said. “The best thing you can do is read
what Nanak wrote at these places and try to get into his mind.’

98

Not far from where Nanak was sitting, there was a jogi wearing only
a lungi with white matted hair falling on both sides of his head and
a long white beard, beating his hemp with a mortar, preparing it for


www.sikhbookclub.com,

RELIGIO~-COMMERCIALISATION 261

hang. Other groups of pilgrims were gathered around him watching
he preparations anxiously. Near the entrance of the shrine, where the
devotees ascended the stairs after taking off their shoes, there was a man
gelling bhangwale pakore (fritters with the addition of cannabis). There
was a crowd of people around him as well.

Looking at the preparation of bhang, one of the main attractions of
festival like this, a jogi carrying an ektara started walking towards the
-rowd singing a song in praise of the intoxicant.

Offer me as well this little green bite of love
that binds with the heart

Offer me as well this little green bite of love
This leaf of insight.

Nanak was repulsed by what he saw. He knew more than the Muslims in
front of him that this was not what Islam taught. In Makkah, when he
was there for the Hajj, he had interacted with various Islamic scholars and
all of them had pointed out that intoxicants of any kind were forbidden
in Islam. In Baghdad where he had stayed for a little while on his way
back from the Hajj, scholars had reiterated the same thing.

Having travelled widely, Nanak had come to the conclusion that
there was no single form of Islam being practised in the world. In Bengal
for example, he had noticed that along with offering their prayers, the
Muslims also venerated Devi Durga in their songs. In South India, he
had noticed that Muslims still practised a rigid caste hierarchy, similar
to the Hindus of that region. So those Muslims whose families had been
Brahmins before conversion still thought of themselves as high caste,
whereas those whose families formerly belonged to the lower castes
were excluded from certain social circles. In Arabia, he had seen a new
form of Islam, alien to the traditions of South Asia. Here he noticed
how local Muslims would sometimes sleep in the Kaaba, using the holy
Book as their head support. Also Arab Muslims never offered prayers,
like Indian Muslims did after offering "47742. In Baghdad where there
Was a strong influence of Shiaism, Nanak had noticed various paintings

of the Prophet and his son-in-law, Ali.



sikhbookclub.com.

www. potash
DFO Amen ate
262 WALKING WITH NANAK

Then of course was the Islam of the dervish, a differen

’ * le ry t brand of
religion even within the South Asian tradition. They smok

: . ed hashish,
consumed bhang, fornicated and sometimes even roamed around naked

Nanak was particularly averse to such manifestations of religiosity, which
was prominent in Hindus as well as Muslims. He usually came ACrogs
them at Muslim shrines. He noticed a few at the shrine of Baba Farid
when he visited it for the first time. After becoming aware of Farid’;
philosophy through his poetry, he realised how far away these dervish
were from the message of the saint they were singing praises of

Having spent twenty-four years of his life travelling, Nanak had
finally settled down at a place called Kartarpur on the banks of the Rayi.
Here he had started working on a piece of land that was
one of his devotees. He was joined by his parents and also his wife and
children and slowly the community around Nanak started growing as
more of his devotees started moving to Kartarpur. Using Kartarpur as
his base, Nanak now started travelling to nearby regions. Uch Sharif was
one of the most famous Muslim shrines in Southern Punjab and Nanak
had arrived here only a day ago, travelling from Kartarpur. The difference
was that Nanak was no longer accompanied by his lifelong companion,
Bhai Mardana. Mardana had passed away in Baghdad while they were
on the way back from the Hajj. Nanak did not have a fixed companion
anymore like in his earlier travels. In his shorter trips he was accompanied
by different younger companions. This time, he was accompanied by the
son of his best friend, who also happened to be a master rubab player.

At the shrine of Jalaludin Bokhari at Uch Sharif, Nanak saw an
overwhelming number of dervish and ascetics, who roamed around the
shrine, pretending to be religious scholars and made fools of innocent
devotees. Some were selling beads, while others sold leaves of trees which
they passed off as sacred entities with magical properties. A few pretended
to practise black magic while others even sold prayers. ,

Nanak wanted to scream to the world that is not the true religio
of Islam. He wanted to tel] them about the message of Farid, which us
Nanak captured the true essence of religion. He went to the shrine Ae
sat under the shadow of the banyan tree which was in the centre 0

7

. + A few
courtyard. To the ordinary folk, he was another dervish or Jog}: A

given to him by


RELIGIO“COM MERCIALISATION

hed his feet, asked for blessings and moved on. Other placed
next to him and moved on. Nanak sat silently, observing the

ctices of the people. “Mardana, play Raag Ashta Padya,’ he

od items
eehignove pra
sid Nanak had forgotten that it was not Mardana that was with him

who, without correcting the Guru, did as instructed.
Nanak sang the following lines:

Ts the opium addict there is nothing like opium.

To the fish water is everything.

Those imbued with the Name of their Lord

Find every prospect pleasing.

May every moment of my life be a sacrifice to Thy Name, O my Master!

My Master is like a tree that beareth fruit
The Name of the fruit is nectar

Those who drink its juice are truly fulfilled
May my life be sacrificed to them!

Thou livest among all creatures

Yet I see Thee not;

How can the thirsty their thirst slake,
Ifa wall separates them from the like?

Nanak is Thy tradesman;

Thou art my Master and my good.
My mind would rid itself of delus ton
If to Thee I addressed my prayer’
And to Thee my petition.”

“Singh, treis. Hymns of the Gurus, pages 414-1 15

263

ATEN SERRE IEE

SO a A IR REe tT tS


Wi

a ss'khbookclub.com:

THE PROPHECY 11

Mehta Kalu was a religious person but not as much as his wife. Being
a éshafriye (warrior caste) Hindu he respected the rites and rituals of the
Hindu religion. He respected mystics and often offered them food when
they resided in the forest around Rai Bhoi di Talwindi but he preferred
consulting conventional religious authorities like the pandits of temples
for his religious and spiritual requirements. He found the unconventional
litestyles of mendicants hard to reconcile with his own beliefs. There
were rumours that they engaged in unrestricted sex, consumed drugs
and defied societal codes. Mehta Kalu was particularly bothered by their
itinerant lifestyle. He worshipped work and looked down upon anyone
he perceived to be shirking their duty of working for a living. He valued
the mystics’ philosophical depth and spiritual prowess but above all he
valued the duty of a man to earn his living.

Tripta on the other hand was much more sympathetic towards
mystics and fakirs. Religious rites and rituals were more of a social
convention for her as opposed to evoking religious devotion. She found
the discourse of the mystics more in tune with her spiritual leanings.

Five months into her pregnancy, Tripta was planning to travel to
her maternal home, a village called Dera Chahal at a little distance from
Lahore. Even though Mehta Kalu wanted her to stay at Rai Bhoi di
Talwindi he knew this was a tradition and he did not want to take any
risks around the birth of his first child by breaking societal codes. God
knows what hell would break loose if he defied tradition.

So about six years after their wedding, the couple was blessed with a
beautiful daughter. When it came to naming the child, it was suggested
by Tripta’s mother that since the child was born in her maternal house,
Nanaka in Punjabi, she should be called Nanaki. Thus, Tripta’s and Mehta
Kalu’s first child came to be called Nanaki.

ss

A gentle breeze blew against the plain, auguring a howling silence. The
city was far from here, silent in the distance. Here on the mound, sitting
under an acacia tree was an old man lost in his thoughts. On the other
side of the mound there were construction cranes slowly digging into the


Win. sib okclub.com,

21
GURU AMAR DAS

When Guru Angad Dev told Amar Das that he had chosen him to be
the next Guru, he asked Amar Das to go away from Khadur where the
Guru was living and stay at Goindwal instead, for a little while. For the
last few years, Amar Das made Goindwal his home. He would come to
Khadur in the mornings, where he would serve the Guru and his family
like a servant and then return to Goindwal in the evening. The Guru
told him that when the time was right for the formal initiation of the
new Guru, he would call him back from Goindwal.

The village of Goindwal was earlier called ‘Gobindwal’ after the
landlord of the area—Gobinda. According to Sikh tradition, Gobinda
once approached Guru Angad Dev at Khadur and asked him to help him
get his rightful property back, which had been taken over by someone.
Angad Dev sent his favourite disciple, Amar Das to solve the problem.
Amar Das found out that Gobinda was the rightful owner of the property
and interceded on his behalf, getting him back what was his. To show
. his love for Amar Das, Gobinda constructed a house for him on his

property, which is where Amar Das started to live.

_ In sending Amar Das to Goindwal, the Guru was following 4
tradition started by Nanak. Nanak too when he appointed Angad Dev
as his suecessor, asked him to move to Khadur as opposed to Kartarpur
Sahib where Nanak was settled. This was to avoid the ire of his sons.

- Angad Dev too had two sons, Datu and Dasu, and he was sure that they


“Maw sikhbookclub.com
GURU AMAR DAS
265

uld oppost the appointment of Amar Das as Guru. When Amar Das
Ww ; . ;
aointed Ram Das as his successor over his sons, he too asked Ram

a .
ie ¢o move to Ramdaspur.

When Amar Das was formally appointed, the earlier Guru, Angad
pev’s eldest son, Datu, refused to accept their ‘family servant’”’ as the
next Guru, as Was feared. After the death of Guru Angad Dev, Amar
Das moved to Goindwal where he established his seat, while Datu sat
on his father’s seat at Khadur. However, the majority of the followers
of Guru Angad Dev preferred to visit Amar Das at Goindwal, hence
gradually the influence of the seat at Khadur became weak. One day,
in fury, Datu went to Goindwal where he found Amar Das seated. He
kicked the Guru off his place and sat there. Amar Das did not return
this act of violence with violence and left for a place called Basarke.
Datu was under the impression that once at Goindwal he would be in
command of the Sikhs but that was not to be. The people there refused
to accept him as the Guru and soon Datu had to leave Goindwal for
Khadur. After much pleading, the devotees of Amar Das were able to
persuade him to come back to Goindwal and be their Guru once again.

The era of Amar Das as the Guru of the Sikh community played an
important role in defining the Sikh community as a separate religious
community. P. S. Grewal writes the following:

The need for providing Sikhism as an organised religion, with
features of identification led Amar Das to evolve various symbols,
customs and institutions, many of which were quite similar
to the Hindu ones. Thus Amar Das built a pilgrimage centre
at Goindwal. Here a holy well or a 4ao/i with 84 steps were
constructed and it was declared that ‘whoever would reverently
Tepeat the Japji on every step should escape the pangs of rebirth.
Thus while pilgrimage to Banaras and Haridwar and bathing
in the Ganga for purification had been decried by Nanak,
Pilgrimage to Goindwal and bathing in the ‘holy’ water there
was advocated as a means to salvation! Another departure from

‘Singh, The History of Sikh Gurus, page 42



www.sikhbookclub.com|

266 WALKING WITH NANAK
earlier Sikh doctrine was the new initiation ceremony introduced
by Amar Das. The Guru's agents were given the right to initiate
new members into the fold via the charnamrit ceremony, i.e. by
making the convert drink the ‘toe wash’ of the religious agent, a

typical Brahminical practice. om

Emperor Akbar is also said to have visited Guru Amar Das at Goindwa|

after hearing of the fame of the Guru.’”? The Guru had a protocol that
all his visitors had to follow. The tradition was that whosoever came to
visit the Guru would have to have food at the langar of the Guru and
only then would he or she be allowed to meet the Guru. When Emperor
Akbar was told about the tradition he too agreed to have food from the
langar of the Guru before meeting him. Impressed by the humility of
the Emperor, the Guru joined the Emperor at the langar and they had
food together.

The Emperor was so impressed by the institutions of the Guru
that he offered to construct a number of langars for the Guru. Guru
Amar Das politely turned down the offer saying that the langar should
be run on the money of the humble Sikhs. Therefore Akbar allotted a
huge tract of land to the daughter of Amar Das, Bibi Bhani, the wife of
Guru Ram Das*° instead. The Emperor also exempted the Sikhs from
paying pilgrimage tax, which was compulsory for the Hindus. This too
played an important role in establishing the Sikh community as a distinct
religious group.

ee “®Grewal, Nanak’s Doctrine, pipes 22-23
ee “Singh, The History of Sikh Gurus, page 45
“Tbid., page 46


22
AN END AND THE BEGINNING

Nanak habitually woke up before dawn. The stars of the night still shone
in the skies, hanging on for just a little while longer to catch sight of
this old man preparing for his daily routine. Nanak lived in a simple hut
that was built of wood and hay, both of which were found in abundance
there. He was still in his night clothes, a white dhoti, bare-chested and
no head cover. His long white hair flowed to his shoulders, while his
beard too was unruly at this time of the day.

Singing his poetry, Nanak walked slowly towards the Ravi that flowed
close to his hut. He had been doing this for the past seventeen years. He
would bathe in the Ravi while singing songs. He walked with his eyes
on the ground, while his shoulders were slouched. It was as if age had

made this man even more humble.
ar drop on his cheek. He had not realised
While singing, he felt a fearctp had been shed did Nanak

when it had fallen. Only after a few tears
" ture was crying for his friend Mardana, who had passed away

ld have waited a little

: dad. If only death cou

eveeal years 36° rf ete have buried his friend with his own hands at

Karn mre oo “bode Here he would have visited his friend’s grave
artarpur, his .

closure was not

eryday and alked @) him, but that last moment of :

i hi I was aa ‘he death of his fri nd that Nanak gave up his
given to him. e

ws 1 th decided to settle some scoshanm
ambition to ne ay ee bis family a dial hivebechihaby
Nanak was fin


www.sikhbookclub.com,

68 WALKING WITH NANAK
tires and they were, but Nanak felt the absence of his best friend anq
lifelong companion. Nothing was the same without him. Today while
picking up his clothes and the /ota that he used for his bath, Nanak
had unconsciously started singing a song that he had sung often With
Mardana. It was because of this that he was crying.

He placed his clothes on the bank of the river and walked into the
water. Far away in the horizon he could see the light blue dawn, the day
was waking up from its slumber. He held both his hands in front of his
chest and took a dip in the water.

During his wanderings around the world, Nanak had no fixed routine,
He did not know where he would go next. At the start of his journey he
had arbitrarily turned east and continued walking till he thought that he
should now turn south. This is how he had travelled the four directions
of the world, Often during their journeys, Mardana would ask when they
would go back home. It was not that Mardana wanted to return but he
just wanted to know their plan. Nanak usually had answers to all the
questions that Mardana or others put to him but he had no answer for
that. He simply shrugged his shoulders saying that they would return
when it was God’s will.

Meanwhile, back in Punjab where Nanak had left his wife and
two sons, his family had become used to a life without the figurehead.
Often they would hear stories of the holy man traversing new heights in
religious matters. His wife, Sulakhni, was a simple woman who did not
understand spiritual concepts. She often heard these concepts without
commenting on them. Even though she never made any bitter remarks
about her husband leaving her and his two sons, everyone who saw her
could tell that she was sad. She spent days without talking to anyone,
just focusing on her chores as the bride of the house and a mother of
two sons. Bebe Nanki was particularly sympathetic towards Sulakhni.
She would often spend hours with her trying to tell her that this was a
sacrifice she had to make for the larger good of the world. She would
say that God would reward her eventually for her patience. Sulakhni
was close to her sister-in-law and found comfort in her words but she
could never express with utter frankness what was in her heart. This was
because she knew that Bebe Nanki was after all Nanak’s sister and her
devotion towards her brother was unquestionable.


AN END AND THR REGINNING Bie

oy
ar:

.. oath was that Sulakhni did not even know what it indi hee
_ shat ste Was SO eager to hide from the mc RR ig

on nor continuously ate away at her Rr 6: ee
sow om the other hand she loved her husband hee wi say rise
a »¢ towards him. Every day while pray WDA C0 5 ¢
gn? Ant Praying to Durga Mata she
att tor the safety and success of her husband's mission, a mission
sy: she had a hard time understanding. Whenever someone came to
oath news of her husband and the amazing things he was doing in
se far away regions of the world, she would pray that more and more
sexe come to know of Nanak and his spiritual mission. This she did
sowing Well enough that it would take Nanak further away from her.

Seeang Sulakhni’s misery, Bebe Nanki decided to look after her eldest
son, Sa Chand. She knew that raising two sons in the absence of a father
would have been a difficult task for a single woman. Bebe Nanki did not
save a child of her own, which made the decision to temporarily adopt
Sa Chand easier. Looking into the deep eyes of this young child, Bebe
Nanki used to feel that she was staring at her brother whom she too
iowed like a mother; such was the physical resemblance between father
ind son. In Sri Chand’s presence, Bebe Nanki felt that she was in the
presence of her brother. , |

With only Sri Lachman to hold onto, Sulakhni devoted herself

comply to ES ee eo ener

vi

Ce ee —



www, sikhbookclub.com|

270 WALKING WITH NANAK

to settle down. He sent tor his family from Talwindi and st
at this small village called Kartarpur,

Sulakhni finally started living with Nanak once again, along with
their two sons, She served Nanak tirelessly, something that she

arted living

had
dreamed of doing for years. Even though her dreams had come true, she

pretended that life had always been like this. When Nanak went for his
morning dip in the river, she prepared his breakfast. Then while he was
away in the fields working on the land, she busied herself with chores,
In the evening, when Nanak would return from the fields, she would
prepare to entertain all his devotees who would come to listen to the
songs of their spiritual master. While everyone listened to the songs, she,
along with a few other women of the community, prepared for the langar
which concluded the evening. She did not object when Nanak told her
that Muslims and even untouchables would be welcome to the langar.
She was aware of her husband's radical views but she had not known
that someday they would be implemented in her own house. The idea
repulsed her initially and for the first few days she could not eat after
looking at the sight of Hindus, Muslims and untouchables sitting under
one roof. But over the years she had become accustomed to the sight.

Behind the veil of his wife’s utter devotion to him, Nanak could sense
the resentment that had accumulated over the years that he had been
away. He could listen to the complaints that those silent eyes made to
him. He knew that he had wronged his wife and children and he wanted
to apologise to them but it was too late, he thought. He did not know
how to broach the topic, especially when everything looked perfect on
the surface. Every day he looked at the devotion of his family towards
him and every day the guilt of abandoning them grew. The fact that they
never expressed their resentment caused Nanak even greater pain. Had
they said something, he would have offered them his excuses but they
accepted him unconditionally.

Till the time that Nanak had been away from his family, he felt that
he was satisfied with the way he had spent his life. When his best friend
passed away, Nanak believed that his time was near as well but the years
: passed and life seemed to continue even without Mardana. Nanak now
wondered if he had done the right thing in abandoning his family at the


ww ikhbooke|
W:sikhbookclub.com
ol ‘ a

:sikhbookclub.com,

AN END AND THE BEGINNING n,
ae that they needed him the most for his spiritual pilgrimage. Now
spat he was their company, he felt selfish, since he was an old man and
needed someone to look after him. Nanak often longed for his old if
if travel without a destination. To relive some moments of the life sha
had NOW ended, he travelled to nearby places with some of his devotees
ar his sons. One of his favourite travel companions after Mardana was ;
young man known as Bhai Lehna. Bhai Lehna would often visit Nanak
at Kartarpur Sahib from Khadur where he lived. Often these two would
spend hours locked in a room talking to each other, while the rest of the
community waited for their spiritual master to present himself to them.
In his company, Nanak lost track of time, whereas Lehna too adored
the company of his spiritual master. In Nanak he had found everything
that he was looking for.

Born into an orthodox family, Lehna was religious to begin with but
as he grew older his interest in religious questions exceeded that of his
family members. He travelled to Hindu temples on pilgrimages to far
away regions. It was on one such pilgrimage that he met Nanak and his
life changed forever. Instead of going to the temple of Durga where he
was headed, he decided to come to Kartarpur Sahib along with Nanak
and spent several days with the spiritual master.

Guru Nanak, on the other hand, was also impressed by the curiosity
and passion of this young man. He had thought that when he came back
his sons would express an interest in the spiritual journey that Nanak
had taken but he was disappointed with their attitude towards his cause.
Both of them were adult men when Nanak returned and had started

living the life that they had chosen for themselves. Lachman Das had
become a businessman and was not at all interested in the spiritual an
intellectual pursuits of his father. Sri Chand, on the other hand’ wor
an active interest in spiritual matters but his dispensation “a oe
extreme. After a few conversations with him ena to the sath of sie
was highly inspired by the yogis and would soon take o the p
= Decomne até choices of his elder son bothered him more
ut of his two sons +s :
than those made by his younger one. In his journey Na 7 he apie
criticised the extreme practices of the ascetics an ry



ee eee

www.sikhbookclub.com

272 WALKING WITH NANAK
his son was on his way to becoming one. Nanak tried arguing with him
and convincing him that he needed to be moderate in his religious
practices but the words that had moved the world to tears and made
thousands of people the followers of Guru Nanak failed to move hic
son. His mind was made up. Nanak blamed himself for the extremes
of his son’s behaviour. He thought that by rebelling against Nanak’
own teachings his son was punishing him for abandoning him at such
a young age.

It had now been seventeen years that Nanak had been leading q
sedentary life. Hundreds of devotees from neighbouring Villages and
beyond came to visit him every day to listen to his sermons. Nanak
tried meeting all of them in person but that had become impossible in
recent years. When Nanak set up his base at one place and started his
kirtan session every evening, his popularity spread far and wide. In the
initial years there had only been a handful of followers but this number
had swelled into hundreds in subsequent years. In the initial years the
community could gather at his house but eventually a new hall was
constructed which could host the huge gathering. This place was reserved
for the evening prayers and was referred to as a Gurdwara by Nanak,
where the Ultimate Guru resided.

Initially, Nanak’s devotees posed all sorts of difficult questions to
him. Some even dared to call him a liar to his face while others argued
until they were convinced. But as the community grew bigger so did
the stature of Nanak as someone who could never be challenged. The
questions grew less and sceptical conversations faded away. Now what
remained between Nanak and almost all of his devotees was a relationship
__ between a spiritual master and his followers. Nanak felt that people were
_ how starting to follow him blindly and this depressed him.

It was in this situation that Nanak met Lehna for the first time.
Lehna showed respect to the older spiritual master but was not afraid
to challenge his religious beliefs. He was not one to give up on his
beliefs easily and argued rigorously. This debate between Nanak and
Lehna continued for months. Lehna would present points in favour of
Hindu deities and Nanak would put them aside one by one through his
counterarguments.



AN END AND THE BEGINNING

[f there was one person besides Mardana who understood :
of Nanak as Nanak himself did, then it was Bhai Lehna, prope:
initial arguments Lehna became a devoted disciple of Guru Nanak and
both of them started to discuss Nanak’s poetry. Lehna would ask Nanak
questions about where and why he had composed particular verses. Lehna
also learned from Nanak the correct raag in which they were meant to
be sung, for the raag in which a particular poem was sung also had a
great influence on the impact those words would have on the listeners.
As much as Lehna wanted Nanak to live forever he was aware of
-he mortality of his Guru, which is why he wanted to spend all his time
with his Guru. Lehna was also aware of the fact that if he wanted to
preserve the message of Guru Nanak, it was important that his words
were recorded. He knew that the songs Nanak had composed would be
preserved for generations to come through singers and dervish, like the
words of other poets had been preserved. But for Lehna, Nanak was
no ordinary poet. He was also a spiritual reformer and it was essential
that along with his poetry his religious message also travelled through
generations. It is for this reason that Lehna decided to collect the poetry
of Nanak in written form.
This was a bold decision a il hat point Punjab ws One
language. Nobody considered it en to be written,
ree: cag et Te se eld have used Shahmukhi, the script
t he felt that Nanak’s words should be
e was different from all the other

ss



ey ee a oe = i



gs er peokclub.com
Dest ren eee CIT OTT ER EIS IIIT NCE A oS

32 WALKING WITH NANAK

ancient mound, not to unearth its archacological secrets but to flatter
the mound to make way for a new suburban locality.

“That is why the mound has diminished in size,’ said Iqbal Qaiser 4
came here a few years ago. The mound was spread over this entire n si
he said, indicating with his arm the network of roads that had been laid
for this new township, called Rehman Gardenia Society.

We climbed the final portion of the mound; a set of staircases, the
only one there, to get to the top of the mound, where the shrine was
located. Here, a man who must have been in his late sixties, sat on a mat
laid out on the floor, showing a group of pilgrims who stood before him,
the sacred rocks. We waited for our turn. |

He removed the green cloth covering the rocks and pointed out

hurriedly with a stick—a niche within the rock, and told us that this is
where Naulakha’s pets, a lion and a lamb drank water. “He was sitting
alone on top of this mound, he said. “When he felt thirsty, he prayed to
Allah and miraculously, water appeared in this bowl.’ Ten rupee notes
were placed within it. Next to it he pointed to other marks on the rocks
which he claimed were the footprints of the lamb and the lion. Then
without letting us dwell on the sight any longer, he covered the rock with
the green cloth and pointed towards another set of rocks placed next
to them, which he claimed read ‘Allah’ and ‘Muhammad’. There was a
tear shaped mark on one rock which he said was the lamp of the saint
and next to it was the forest that existed there, sketched in the shape
of coniferous trees on a small rock which was around two feet by two
feet in size.

‘Give your offerings to the rock, he told me and I was forced to place
a ten rupee note on the rock. He then picked up a rose petal and placed
it in my mouth. ‘Eat it, he said. He then smeared oil on his finger from
a lamp nearby and put it on my hair. My ritualistic offering at the shrine
was complete. There was another pilgrim waiting behind me.

Next to the shrine was a small room made of rocks. “There were
structures like these all over the mound,’ Iqbal Qaiser told me. It was 2
small room where only one person could sit. ‘They must have been for
ascetics who wanted to meditate.’

In the book called The First Sikh Spiritual Master by Harish Dhillon


www. sikhbookclub.com,

2i4 WALKING WITH NANAK

conversation before he had entered and now all of them h
The silence in the room was too strong to be casual. Thi
silence. Nanak longed to be a part of the family conve

ad gone quiet,
S Was a forced

2 pa he Tsation but his
long absence had estranged him from his family. In the past his varion.

. _ ; aious
attempts at conversation had tailed and he noticed that it Was only wh
. J en

he was not around that the two sons and their mother became garrulous

Sri Chand and his mother were particularly close. Nanak could tell by
looking at their expressions that they were discussing something serious
and that too about him. There were a few stress lines on the forehead of
his eldest son, while his wife looked embarrassed. Nanak did not know
how to ask them what they were talking about but before he could think
of a strategy to broach the topic, his son Sri Chand said, ‘Bapuji, I need
to talk to you about something important.’

‘All my time is for you, my son. What is it that brings so much
frustration on your face?’ said Nanak.

Sri Chand ignored the polite reply of his father and continued
speaking, ‘I am not happy with how much time you spend with Lehna.
He says that he is your devotee but he is still a practising Hindu. He still
worships Durga in his house. People have told me. He doesn’t understand
your message like your own blood does. And now I have heard that you
are about to appoint him as your spiritual successor. How can that be?
That has no precedent in history. By the laws of spirituality your spiritual
prowess has been passed onto me, your eldest son, not to someone who
is not even related to you. How can you do this to us? Your own family?
You left us when we needed you and now this.’

Surprised by his own audacity, Sri Chand became silent. Sulakhni
continued pretending to be busy with her household chores. Lachman
was also quiet and wore an expression which showed that he knew that
there was no point to this conversation. He was a businessman and his job
had hardened him. He had seen the ugly side of the world and nothing
surprised him anymore. .

After a poignant silence Sri Chand asked his father, ‘Have you nae
up your mind, Bapuji? Are you going to make Lehna your successor
What will the world say? I will become a laughing stock.’

‘You should listen to your blood,’ said Sulakhni. ‘Who will take care

of us? Don't you want your family to be happy?’


AN END AND THE BEGINNING ~
Nanak listened = his son and wite with patience. He was
expecting such a reaction trom his own family. He too was Bes wy nol
ac they were } . aS ¢ isappointed
in them as they were in him. Maybe, he had expected too much of them
He had i. mah that they would understand his decision but this outburst
made it clear that he was alone even in his family. ‘Sri Chand, listen to
me. You will always be my son and no matter what anyone says, that can
never change. My God knows that Llove you more than anything else in
the world and can do anything for you but what you ask me to do, that
| cannot do. That is not my decision. These decisions are written in our
destinies. It was your destiny to be born into my household but it is not
in your destiny to be my spiritual descendant, That has to be Bhai Lehna.’

Saying this, Nanak walked out of the house to his fields, where he
worked every day after breakfast. He was not going there to work today
but to spend some time away from his family. Nanak did not have his
breakfast that morning. His family’s reaction had put him in mental
agony.

Nanak walked in the fields all day, inspecting the wheat that he had
grown. He passed his hands gently over them as if caressing them. He
watched the birds fly over his head and observed the path of the sun.
He walked around the river, allowing his thoughts to flow with the
currents of the Ravi. In the evening he returned to the gurdwara he had

as usual, the audience was starting to gather. Bhai

constructed, where
g for his Guru and so was Baba Budha,

Lehna was there as well, waitin
another loyal disciple of Nanak. . |
‘What is it, Guruji? You look tense today?’ said Bhai Lehna, as soon
s it,
as he saw the forlorn face of Nanak. — |
‘T have something on my mind, Bhai Lehna. I am worried about what
: 1 afte ath. 1 know that my sons don’
will become of my movement after my i " " that my ™~ de i t
; : 3 could be lost forever, said INanak.
think like me and soon my MESSABE NT We will keep your
We are your children, Guruyly Sv6 ehna, ‘We will keep you
e. We will not let this movement ‘ie. Nanas f
x eseien j 4 smile appeared on Nanak’s face. He
For the first time in the day a smile app ak le
, d and said, ‘Lehna you are my true son. You are my
took Lehna’s hand ane * }

Aesh and my blood. You are 4 part of my body, my angad (of one’s body).
esh and my - you are the best person to continue my mission after my
at yo

message aliv

Iam sure th



www.sikhbookclub.com
276 WALKING WITH NANAK

death. Nobody understands my message better than you. You are m
spiritual successor.’ :

Saying this, he gestured towards Baba Budha to come for
apply saftron paste on Bhai Lehna’s forehead. Nanak then put five copper
coins and a coconut at Lehna’s feet and bowed to him. Bhai Lehna tried
stopping Nanak but he was persistent. Facing the crowd Nanak then
said, ‘Hear this, my devotees. I have appointed Bhai Lehna, who js from
now on to be known as Guru Angad, as my successor. He is your second
Guru. I have appointed him as the Guru and if you have ever accepted
me as your Guru you should now accept him as your Guru.’

WW

Sitting on a charpoy, the policemen who were having tea looked at us
suspiciously. Trying not to provoke them, ] parked the car near the main
gate instead of taking it inside the gurdwara, even though the gate was
open. An old man walking with his wife walked straight into the gateway
that I was reluctant to enter. I was sure he was a Muslim and belonged
to a neighbouring village. 1 was surprised that he was allowed to enter
without any trouble. This was not like any other gurdwara, it turned out.
This was Kartarpur Sahib, the final resting abode of Guru Nanak and
here, Muslims were allowed to enter.

This gurdwara is located about an hour away from the city of Narowal.
This is the border area; hence the roads are in a bad condition. To get
to this shrine, we had to get off the main road and drive on a mud track
towards the Ravi, which still flows next to the shrine.

‘Do you know, when I came here for the first time, I had to walk
from the main road to the gurdwara,’ said Iqbal Qaiser, while we were

- driving on the track. This was a road of about three kilometres. There
were rice paddies around us, partially flooded. This year too the monsoon
_ had arrived earlier than expected, flooding the agricultural fields. In the
case of rice paddies, flooding was good as rice requires a lot of water to

grow.

It seemed as if Iqbal Qaiser knew the policemen. One of them had
recognised him and greeted hin) quite respectfully, something that is

Ward and


%

www. sikhbookclub.com,

AN END AND THE BEGINNING 277
unusual of Pakistani policemen. He stood up on seeing him and laughed
along with him. Sitting in the car, J could see that he was gesturing to
[qbal Qaiser to take the car inside the gurdwara.

We drove into the gurdwara. The main shrine was protected by
newly constructed wall. We parked our car next to what appeared to
be an airplane missile preserved in a glass case. On a marble plaque next
to it, it was written that this missile was dropped here by the Indian
forces in 1971 but due to the miracle of Guru Nanak, it did not blow
up.

This was rather strange as I had imagined Sikh heritage would
prepare the ground for the two hostile countries to come together but
in this case it was being used to further antagonise the two countries.
This had its legacy in the Khalistan movement of the 1980s when
Sikhs in India fought against the Congress-led Indian government to
carve out a separate state for the Sikhs. They were supported by the
Pakistani government in this struggle. The Sikh diaspora residing in
England, Canada and USA were sympathetic towards the cause. In those
times, they established a relationship with the Pakistani government, a
relationship that continues to survive, even though the movement has
faded away. It is due to the pressure of these wealthy and powerful Sikhs
that the government initially renovated the Sikh gurdwaras.

Next to the showcase with the missile, there was a well, covered with
marble. A plaque next to it read that this was the well that was used by
Guru Nanak to water his fields. I looked deep into the fields to imagine
a peasant-like Nanak tolling away in the humid monsoons. In front of
me was some haphazardly grown sugarcane. A peasant, wearing muddy
clothes, worked in the fields. Looking at Nanak toiling under the sun,
who could have said that he was the Nanak of history, who had inspired
millions of people? Some scholars have argued that the beauty of Nanak’s
message is that through his own example, he glorified peasantry. His
message was that work, no matter what it is, should be treated as a sacred
activity and hence an act of worship. We took our shoes off, covered our
heads with skullcaps that were placed next to the entrance and walked
into the shrine. The main structure was in the middle of a courtyard,
while around it there were rooms meant to be used to house pilgrims.


es WALKING WITH NANAK

‘There was 2 grave next to the main shrine. It was out in the

sical lowers covering i allover: There was no tombstone idea
its occupier, however, there was 2 couplet etched on it.

Se ay teat hae coon ws st the cota ws gaes
sn Front of the grave offering prayers. After a little while, the man homes

Sewrards the fect of the grave, while the woman touched it with her hand
and passed it over her head, blessing herself with the auspicious touch,
of the holy person buried within. The family left soon after

‘Agbal Sahib, I find it really odd that no grave marks the spot where
Mardana was buried. According to one story, he passed away in Baghdad
but there is another story which says that Mardana returned to Punjab
with Nanak and died here in Kartarpur. It was, however, his last wish
that no shrine be constructed over his grave. Let's discard the first story
for a little while and assume that Mardana came back. Is it possible ther
the story about Mardana not wanting a shrine was added later on to
explain the origin of this grave and is it possible that this is the grave of
‘Bhai Mardana next to the samadhi of his Guru”

te

ee oe
ssed maya controversy erupted. His followers started to argu



i A eS Sal Sa ey a nine
an Se

Www PE ie
‘Sikhbook)
fe)
“ad
AN END AND THE BEGINNING 279

af

A young boy who must have been in his late teens or early twenties
,pproached me and said, ‘No photography.’ I couldn't tell if he was a
Muslim or Sikh boy. My guess was that he was probably a government
official deputed here and most probably a Muslim.

Jt’s alright,’ said Iqbal Qaiser, jumping into the conversation. ‘My
name is Iqbal Qaiser and I already have all the photos of this place.
Everyone knows me here. Who is the Granthi here nowadays?’

‘Inderjit, said the boy ina meek voice, not sure what to make of these
rwo strange men in front of him refusing to stop taking photographs.

‘Where is he?’

‘He is there in the camps.’

‘Go tell him Iqbal Qaiser is here.’

The boy ran off with a worried expression on his face. Perhaps he
thought he might have offended two very important people and now
he was in trouble.

‘Go ahead, photograph all you want, said Iqbal Qaiser.

I too was surprised. I had never seen Iqbal Qaiser so confident and
defiant. His manner of talking usually comes across as very meek and

sombre, a sign of his humility, but today he was authoritative.
Jass door that led into the main shrine, where the

I tried opening the g
samadhi of Nanak was situated but it was locked. If the samadhi and the

grave are both considered to be the final resting place of Nanak then why
is the grave discriminated against? This too should be within the main
shrine. The main building was constructed around the samadhi, whereas
side of the building. Iqbal Qaiser told me that the
original building was destroyed in a flood several years ago and this new
one was built later. Perhaps when this was constructed the Muslim and
Sikh communities had drifted further apart. The grave of Nanak became
a casualty of the growing Muslim-Sikh antagonism.

‘Sir, Inderjit Sahib is calling you to his room, said the boy after he
returned in a little while. We were escorted to Inderjit’s shed, which had

been constructed recently with the help of the Sikh Diaspora. The boy

asked us to wait for a little while as Inderjit was getting dressed. It was
a Sunday morning and we had arrived unexpectedly.

the grave was on one


Mew sikhbookclub.com

280) WALKING WITH NANAK

We took off our shoes at the entrance and entered his room. It wag
a spacious place with a double bed on one side and a sofa set on the
other. Geo, the most popular news channel of the country was playing
on the television, covering the floods in Sindh and lower Punjab. Inderjit
appeared from another room, which I assumed to be the bathroom, _

‘Sat Sri Akal ji Shri Maharaj \qbal Qaiser Singh Sahib,’ he said, He
gestured to touch Iqbal Qaiser’s knees in a teasing manner, while Iqbal
Qaiser patted him on the back. After brief introductions, Iqbal Qaiser
told me to ask Inderjit the questions that I wanted to for my research,
while he busied himself watching the news.

Inderjit told me that his family belonged to a village in Faisalabad
district. They weren't Sikhs but Nanak Panthi Hindus. However his garb
was that of a baptized Sikh, the Khalsa of Guru Gobind Singh, perhaps
reflective of the larger change in trend since the past few years as the
Sikh community in post-Khalistan days exerts its separate identity. At the
time of Partition when the rest of the Sikhs from their village migrated
to India, his grandfather too was on his way but they were stopped near
the border by the Muslims of their village. They assured him that if he
came back and lived with them they would provide him with security.
Overwhelmed by the love that was offered to him, his grandfather moved
back to his ancestral village and lived a peaceful life till the war of 1965.

In 1965, his family moved to Nankana. I asked Inderjit if that was
because of the blowback of the war but he said he didn’t know. I asked
him if their land like that of Boota Singh was taken away from them
but it seemed as if he didn’t want to talk about it. I didn’t need him
to tell me that something horrible happened with their family during
the India-Pakistan war of 1965. Theirs would not be an isolated case.
Instances of violence against Sikhs and Hindus were reported from all
over the country during the three wars that were fought between India
and Pakistan. But I am surprised that Inderjit refused to talk about that
era, whereas he was candid about so many other things. Is it because he
was now a government official and lived under its protection?

The Pakistani establishment is paranoid that talking about minority
issues would present a bad image of Pakistan and hence they a
particularly wary about the minorities talking about their woes fe


Wwww.sikhbookclu b.com

AN END AND THE BEGINNING 281

journalists and writers. Inderjit lives under the blessings of the Pakistani
establishment which regularly monitors the activities of Sikhs in Pakistan.
Perhaps he doesn’t want to offend his protectors,

Somewhere towards the east, across the river is the India-Pakistan
border, the symbol of hostility between these two countries. I ask
Iqbal Qaiser and Inderjit to show me the border. We walked out of his
room and headed towards the Ravi. In front of us was the meandering
river, flowing peacefully on the plains of Punjab. Defying man-made
boundaries, the river sometimes crosses into India while at other points
it comes back to Pakistan.

The river was a beautiful sight, its brown water refurbished by the
early monsoon. Otherwise, the river is parched throughout the year. At
certain points the river had broken its banks and flooded the fresh green
fields that surrounded it, most of which were rice fields. The river must
have been much stronger about five hundred years ago when Nanak
lived. Standing here I could imagine Nanak walking into the river and
performing ashnan. Had Radcliffe made a minor error on the map of
Punjab in front of him by only a few centimetres, the shrine of Kartarpur
Sahib would have ended up in India and today hundreds of devotees
would have been taking a dip in this holy water. The Ravi would have
been a holy river, like it was at the time of the Vedas.

‘Do you know the locals have a myth about the Ravi and the shrine
of Nanak?’ asked Inderjit. “They say that the river floods every twenty odd
years and comes right up to the shrine. This is the river paying tribute
to the shrine of Nanak.’

‘By locals you mean local Muslims?’ J asked.

‘Yes.’

Do the locals still come to the shrine?’

‘Yes. There is a grave of Nanak next to his samadhi. They come here
regularly and offer their fateha (first verse of the Quran, used as a prayer)
just like they would at any Muslim shrine. The locals regard Nanak as a

“nt. erjit.
oun Stee I came here the first time, this had not become
» added Iqbal Qaiser. “This used to be a centre for

5s etal
a shrine it 1s tocay to the border. Drug addicts too had

i imi
smugglers because of its proximity



Www.si khbookclub.com,
‘

WALKING WITH NANAK

to
Se
No

established a place for themselves. Other locals though still came to the
grave of Nanak. Here they would present their offerings and also clean,
the shrine as a service. This tradition continued since it was Prevalent
even before Partition.’

‘So these people must have been those whose ancestors were devotees
of Nanak before Partition. Perhaps some of them even met with Nanak
when he lived here,’ I said.

‘We established this gurdwara in 2001, said Inderjit. ‘This is when
we renovated the structure. We also prepared our first langar here at
that time. Even today, rich Muslim families of the neighbouring villages
provide us with monetary support to cook langar. This is their offering
to the shrine. For them this is a sacred space. The wood that we require
for cooking langar is provided to us by the Rangers.’

‘Do the Muslim devotees also eat langar?’ | asked.

“Well not at the beginning. They were hesitant to eat food cooked by
Sikhs. They had all sorts of absurd ideas about how we cooked our food.
They would come to us and ask us the most absurd questions. But over
the years as the myths dispersed they started eating langar here. Today,

more Muslims eat food here compared to Sikhs.’

This was a fascinating revelation for me. The shrine of Nanak as it
was meant to be, continued to be sacred for Muslims as well as Hindus
and Sikhs,

I tried catching a glimpse of the border but it was obscured by the
thick foliage of trees. Somewhere behind those trees was the Indian
border, behind which was a thick fence. Behind that fence, looking in
our direction through powerful binoculars, were Indian pilgrims, who

gather there to perform darshan of the shrine of Guru Nanak. Hundreds
of people gather there every day,
“How amazing would it be for them if they were allowed to enter
Pakistan from here, visit the shrine of Nanak and then return?’ I said.
‘Discussions on those lines are goin & on nowadays. There are talks to
declare this region a peace corridor and under that arrangement Indian
pilgrims will be allowed to enter Pakistan without a visa to visit the shrine
of Guru Nanak. The Pakistani government has given its approval to the
__ Proposal; however the Indian government is not ready to implement


bier
“ww.sikhbookclub,com,
AN END AND THE BEGINNING
; 284

the deal. They say that this peace corridor would be used by terrorists.’

Iqbal Qaiser. y terrorists,
Iqbal Qaiser and Inderjit engaged in discussions about agriculture
while | made notes about my visit to this place, sitting sent to a ture
After a little while, I overheard Inderjit telling Iqbal Qaiser a
giant snake that they had recently seen in the vieiphiboiring fields ‘It
was bigger than two humans combined,’ he said. It turns out that this
place has a lot of snakes. ‘We find them regularly in our fields. We then
place them next to the shrine. After paying their respects they return.
Ajl they want to do is to catch a sight of the shrine.’

On the way back to the car, Inderjit showed us the renovations that
were taking place at the shrine. Right now there was only the shrine and
, few rooms which were reserved for the caretakers. Soon there would be
as well as a pool. ‘Iqbal Sahib, I don't understand our Sikh

’ said Inderjit while showing us his plans for the renovations.
da have complained that the

Sikh. They say that it

aid

a langar hall
community,
‘\ Jot of Sikhs from England and Cana
architecture of the shrine is not, strictly speaking,

has a lot of features of Muslim architecture.’
He pointed out the arches of the shrine, which were plain. This

was a feature of Muslim architecture. Sikh arches were usually three-
cusped. But at the end of the day these were only vague distinctions as
architectural influences crept from one tradition to another. I remember
that in my ancestral house in Sargodha, the arches were three-cusped,
hence Sikh, even though we were a Muslim family.

This comment on Sikh architecture took me back to the lecture of
Iqbal Qaiser at LUMS, where I first met him. The lecture was titled SikA
Architecture in Lahore. \n that lecture, Iqbal Qaiser pointed out that like
the Sikh religion, which picks up from both Hinduism and Islam, Sikh
architecture draws inspiration from both Hindu and Muslim architecture.
He pointed to the domes of Sikh shrines, which were initially part of the
Muslim buildings, but when the Sikhs picked it up they interpreted it
a their own manner, making them smaller and adding other features to

‘t. Now such domes are also used in Muslim buildings in Pakistan. One
can find si -tural influences on Sikh arches. Within

milar Islamic architec ‘ Si he
Sikh shrines there are usually elaborate graphic depictions of Sikh Gurus



Wy ¥

¥.sikhbookclub.com

THE PROPHECY 13
tis stated that Mata Triptaji, the mother of Guru Nanak, did not have a
child for a long time after her marriage and she would regularly visit an
ancient Hindu temple situated on top of a mound not very far from Rai
Bhoi di Talwindi to pray for a child. The name of Rai Bhoi di Talwindi
has been changed to Nankana Sahib in honour of the first Sikh Guru
who was born there. This mound, the only one in this area, is next to a
city called Shahkot, which is only a few kilometres from the holy city
of Nankana Sahib.

‘Could that temple on top of a mound be the mound next to the
shrine of Baba Naulakha Hazari?’ I asked Iqbal Qaiser as we walked
down. Prior to our visit to the mound, we had visited the main shrine
where the saint is said to have been buried. Here the officials of the Augaf
(Wakfin India) Department, a government organisation responsible for
managing the affairs of this Muslim shrine, had handed us a booklet
describing the history of this Muslim saint. In that booklet, the period
of existence of the saint is recorded to be a few years before the birth
of Guru Nanak and it was also stated that Guru Nanak was born after
Baba Naulakha Hazari prayed for his mother.

‘This is not authentic history though,’ warned the officer-in-charge,
an old man, surrounded by a group of younger officials, none of whom
had any work. ‘All the :nformation we have about this saint is through
folk stories.’

In our modern understanding of history, we give little importance to
oral versions of history, which are not authenticated by the written word.
We have inherited this academic attitude from the British, who are a
product of the written word. Historically, in South Asia, oral transmission
of history has been much more important than the written version. We
have been recording versions of history in our folk tales, legends, myths,
songs, names and other such sources, which an academic historian who
tends to favour the written word might reject as apocryphal. Records of
ancient mounds can be found in folk tales long before they are discovered
by professional archaeologists. For example, at the shrine of Shahjamal
in Lahore it is said that the saint buried an entire city under his foot in
wrath long before it was discovered that the location of his shrine could
be the site of a mound with archaeological importance. Similarly, in



i 5 .
Seco lernean A aehna B antes eg

284 WALKING WITH NANAK

and also sometimes Hindu deities (in older buildings). These influences <<
crept in from the Hindu tradition.

In such a complex relationship within architectural and religious
traditions, how can one make distinctions between Muslim, Hindy
or Sikh influences? Islam carried forward a lot of pre-Islamic Arabian
religious practices. Hinduism was immensely influenced by Buddhism in
the first century CE. Nanak was aware of these fluid boundaries. That's
what he preached and that’s what he wanted his sect to be. Instead of
which, Sikhism, a distinct religion with its own exclusive boundaries,
emerged out of Nanak’s philosophy. Had Nanak supervised the
construction of his own shrine, would he have allowed Muslim influences
in the building, which the Sikh Diaspora now complained against?

As Iqbal Qaiser and I drove away, I caught a glimpse of Nanak’
shrine in the rearview mirror. As the car slowly moved further away,
3 the building appeared to grow smaller, and then after a little while, it

__ was only a memory.



Wy .
Ba Sih 7
whoo cup

i)

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Rhattacharya, Sabyasachi. Approaches to History: Essays in Indian I listoriopraph
‘ouneil of FY ‘ opraphy,

New Delhi: Indian Council of Historical Research in Association with Pr -

r011. Print rire,

Cunningham, Joseph I Javey, and HLL. O. Garrett, A History of the Sikhs, from the
O: igen of the Nation to the Battles of the Sutlej, New Delhi: *y, ( “hand 1466 Print
Dhillon, Harish, The First Sikh Spiritual Master: Timeless Wisdom from the Lafe

and Leachings of Guru Nanak, Woodstock, VT: SkyLiyht Paths Pub, 2006, Print.

Gandhi, Surjit Singh. History of the Sikh Gurus: A ¢ somprehensvve Study, Dedbi:
Gur Das Kapur, 1978. Print, )

Grewal, |. S. /fistory, Literature, and Identity: Four Centuries of Sikh Tradition
New Delhi: Oxtord UP, 2011. Print.
Grewal, P.S.‘Nanak’s Doctrine and the Feudalisation of the Sikh Gurudor.,’

Social Setentist 11.5 (1983): 16-32, JSTOR. Web, 20 Aug, 2014. <http://www.

jstor.org/stable/10,2307/3517100?refeno-x-route:699f2def62feec6B 123 5b0
aS9dS1197>,

Kohli, Mohindar Pal. Guru Tegh Bahadur: Testimony of Conscience. New Delhi:
Sahitya Akademi, 1992. Print.

Qaiser, lqbal. Historical Sikh Shrines in Pakistan. Lahore: Punjabi History Board,
1998, Print.

Singh, Khushwant, trans. //ymns of the Gurus. New Delhi: Viking, 2003. Print.
Singh, Nikky-Guninder Kaur. Sikhism: An Introduction. London: 1. B. Tauris,
2011, Print.

Singh, Prithi Pal. Zhe History of Sikh Gurus. New Delhi: Lotus, 2006. Print.

Singh, Trilochan. Guru Nanak: Founder of ‘Sikhism; a Biography. Delhi: Gurdwara
Parbandhak Committee, 1969. Print.

Syan, | dardip Singh. Sikh Militancy in the Seventeenth Century: Religious Violence
in Mughal and Early Modern India. London: 1. B. Tauris, 2013. Print.
‘Chapter X.’ Life of Guru Nanak: Chapter X. N.p., n.d, Web. 15 Dec. 2013.
chttp://wwwzsacred-texts.com/skh/tsr1/tsr] 13.htm>. ,

Sri Guru Granth Sahib Raags Index—Author: Baba Sheikh Farid-—-SearchGurbani.

com. Nip, n.d, Web. 12 Keb, 2014. chttp://searchgurbani.com/guru_granth_
sahib/author/Baba%20Sheikh%20 Farid>.


Sa F we re a A etek es eager ws Ff “4 ate a an?
care (core “aenak + aperioten ws hae nee fuga wera rar af Sei etagace 1 cai Pe
ESt% Bisdhect vere gedes Newt beadic a0 apres Ties ry cid Meguiecliponegas

SS 25/24 « Uae aca eettiow at KRartaryeet

£9.00 & Cher Neeeuak racers worse ard ( paris Argreed e: spyppourted a: the nares Came

96.8% ~ Gera Been Daas marries Bids Bhan, the danghter of Crore Age Dye
$33.2 ~ Gers Angad pases ewer an
Leora
g374 ~ Gare Annet Das paves awry aed Crore Kamm Thee xt agippctectind ap thee
meccett (paar
1877 ~The cometrection of Amrit Sar begins om the orders of Chere Blame Das

ly Crap Ram Das panes away and Crary Anan o apyenntesd a bee secicinennt

= Primes Sedeem trocar Eenperroe J ebsamgie

ib ~ Prence Kicuseo onbsebe agacret Pempere Laharger
> The seein 0» defeated! ecad Cure Arjan se asesasineted cm ther onion

des ee wewcemepiacn to the ree lbces |

ee ae



CHRONOLOGY

1664 - Guru Harkrishan reaches Delhi to appear in the court of Emperor

surangzeD

1664 - Guru Harkrishan passes away and Guru Tegh Bahadur is appointed
ys the next Guru

1675 - Guru Tegh Bahadur is asked to appear in front of the Mughal Emperor

Aurangzeb and is assassinated

1675 - Guru Gobind Singh is appointed as the next Guru

1705 - All the sons of Guru Gobind Singh are assassinated by the Mughal forces
1707 - Emperor Aurangzeb dies

1708 - Guru Granth Sahib is declared to be the living Guru for eternity by
Guru Gobind Singh

1708 - Guru Gobind Singh is assassinated by a Pathan horse trader


THE GURUS OF SIKHISM

1. Guru Nanak (1469-1539)

Guru Nanak, the first Guru, is believed to be the founder of Sikhism, Born
Talwandi (now known as Nankana Sahib in Pakistan) on October 20, 1469 be

2. Guru Angad (1504-1552, Guru from 1539 to 1552)

Originally called Lehna he was given the title of Guru Angad by Guru Nanak
when he appointed him as his successor bypassing his progeny. Guru Angad
became a disciple of Guru Nanak after he had settled at Kartarpur Sahib. After
his appointment as the Guru he moved to Khadur on the instructions of Guru
Nanak to avoid conflict with Sri Chand, Guru Nanak’s eldest son. Guru Angad
played a crucial role in preserving Nanak’s poetry by inventing the Gurmukhi
script, and committing his words in the written form. Following his Guru's
tradition he too composed verses and appointed not his son but his disciple
as the next Guru.

3. Guru Amar Das (1479-1574, Guru from 1552 to 1574)

After being appointed as the next Guru, Guru Amar Das was asked to move
from Khadur to Goindwal by Guru Angad Dev to avoid conflict with Guru
Angad Dev’s son, who wanted the seat of Gurudom for himself, Guru Amat
Das played an important role in establishing the Sikhs as a distinct religion
community, separate from Hindus and Muslims, by introducing various symp
customs and institutions. He had cordial relationship with Emperor Akbar a
is believed to have allotted a vast tract of land to his daughter, where later : if
“city of Ramdaspur (Amritsar) was established. Therefore it was under him t

¥

5 the feudalisation of the Gurudom began.


Www sikhbooke
www sikhbookclub.com,

THE GURUS OF STKHISM 29

4, Guru Ram Das (1534-1581, Guru from 1574 to 1581)

Born in 1534 Guru Ram Das became the first Sodhi Guru, Following him the
institution of Gurudom remained within the Sodhi family till Guru Gobind
singh. Guru Ram Das is known for starting the construction of the Harminder
Sahib, which during the time of his son became the most important pilgrimage
for Sikhs. Guru Ram Das is also believed to have appointed his Masand or
deputies in different regions which were responsible for spreading the Guru's
message into farflung regions and also collect offerings from his devotees. This
system was finally abolished by Guru Gobind Singh because of the corruption
that had seeped into it. Guru Ram Das also encouraged trade which meant that
the revenue of the seat of the Guru began to increase under him. Before passing
away he bypassed his elder son Prithi Chand in the favour of his younger son,
Arjan Dev, to be appointed as the next Guru, thus beginning a conflict that

was to last for several generations after him.

5. Guru Arjan Dev (1563-1606, Guru from 1581 to 1606)

Regarded as the first martryr of Sikhism, Guru Arjan was assassinated by
Emperor Jahangir in the year 1606 for his alleged support to Khusro, the
eldest son of Jahangir, who had rebelled against his father. ‘The Sikhs believe
that he was assassinated due to the connivance of one Chandu Shah who
wanted to marry his daughter to Guru Arjan’s son, but was refused by the
Guru. The assassination of Guru Arjan marks the beginning of a long conflict
between Mughal authorities and Sikh Gurus. Guru Arjan is responsible for
the completion of the Harminder Sahib and Amrit Sar, the pool of nectar. He
also began the compilation of Guru Granth Sahib, collecting the poetry of all
former Gurus and other saints of Hindu and Muslim origin which aligned
with the philosophy of the Gurus. A prolific writer himself he has the greatest
number of hymns in the Guru Granth Sahib followed by Guru Nanak. Guru
Arjan is also responsible for introducing the daswandh, a system through which
his followers were expected to contribute 10% of their earning to the cause of

the Guru.

1644, Guru from 1606 to 1644)
Guru Har Gobind began the process of

militarisation of the Sikh community following the assassination of his father.
He became the first Guru to wear two swords on his person, one of which
represented temporal power while the other spiritual power. He was also the

6. Guru Hargobind (1595-

Known as the ‘soldier-saint



mww.sikhbookclub,com,

290 WALKING WITH NANAK

first Guru to not have composed any single hymn. In the beginning of his office
he remained in conflict with Emperor Jahangir, who also incarcerated him iy
Gwalior, but later on they established a cordial relationship with the Gury
helping the Emperor in a couple of his military expeditions.

7. Guru Har Rai (1630-1661, Guru from 1644 to 1661)

During the civil war between Aurangzeb and his elder brother Darah Shikoh,

Guru Har Rai supported the former. It is asserted that once when Darah Shikoh

fell sick and no one was able to provide him respite, he recovered through a

medicine that was sent to him by Guru Har Rai. After his recovery Dara Shikoh

became his devotee and their relationship continued till his death. Following

in the tradition of his father he too kept a military force which he promised to
Dara Shikoh against his brother. Once Dara Shikoh was captured and killed
Guru Har Rai was ordered by Emperor Aurangzeb to present himself to Delhi
and clarify his position during the civil war. The Guru is believed to have sent
his elder son, Ram Rai, who in order to appease the Emperor misquoted a
poem by Guru Nanak. The Guru disowned him hence giving birth to a new
sect which was to cause trouble for the next Gurus. At his deathbed the Guru
was disillusioned by the Mughal authorities and ordered his son, the next Guru,
to stay away from Mughal politics.

8. Guru Harkrishan (1656-1664, Guru from 1661 to 1664)

Appointed as the Guru at the age of 6, after the insolence of his elder brother
Ram Rai, the child Guru found himself in a difficult situation when he was
summoned to Delhi by the Emperor Aurangzeb for pretending to be the heir
to his father on the complaints of Ram Rai. At his deathbed his father had
ordered him to stay away from the Mughal court, however a direct order from
the Emperor could also not be rejected. Travelling to Delhi with his retinue
the Guru stalled his meeting with the Emperor and instead chose to serve the
people of the city who were suffering from cholera and then chickenpox. The
Guru too fell sick to chicken-pox and passed away before he could appear in
the Mughal court thus keeping his promise to his father.

9. Guru Tegh Bahadur (1621-1675, Guru from 16644 to 1675)

Guru Tegh Bahadur was appointed as the next Guru when the Sikh community
_ was in a precarious position. The community was divided due to the glen
: aes . e

of various descendants of the previous Gurus. In order to take control of th


THE GURUS OF SIKHISM

291

situation the Guru travelled immensely forging relationship with his community
and also forming new political alliances. Guru Tegh Bahadur was the second
Sikh Guru to be assassinated by a Mughal Emperor. It is believed that he
stood up for the right of oppressed Hindu Brahmins from Kashmir against
the mighty Aurangzeb, for which he had to lose his life. Guru Tegh Bahadur

was also a poet like the former Gurus and many of his hymns are included in

the Guru Granth Sahib.

10. Guru Gobind Singh (1666-1708, Guru from 1675 to 1708)

Before heading to Delhi Guru Tegh Bahadur appointed his son Guru Gobind
Singh as his heir and the next Guru. Thus at a young age he became the head of
the Sikh community. Known as a warrior and a poet the Guru worked tirelessly
to protect the Sikh community from being extinguished by the Mughal Empire.
He founded the Khalsa (The Pure Ones) in 1699, giving the Sikh community
its distinct attire and identity. He saw the death of all of his sons during his
lifetime at the hands of the Mughal authorities. He completed the composition
of the Guru Granth Sahib and before his death appointed it as the next Guru

for eternity.

11. Guru Granth Sahib (Guru from 1708 to eternity)

Believed to be a living Guru, the Guru Granth Sahib contains the poetry of
several Sikh Gurus including Guru Nanak, Guru Angad Dey, Guru Amar
Das, Guru Ram Das and Guru Arjan. The Granth also contains poetry of
several non-Sikh saints including Baba Farid, Bhai Mardana and Bhagat Kabir.
Treated as a living Guru the Granth is provided with a special room in all Sikh
Gurdwaras and is present at every Sikh ceremony.


‘www.sikhbookclub.com

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

This book would have never seen the light of the day without the help and
support of the following people—my wife Anam Zakaria, who patiently
listens to all my ideas and bears with my moments of insanity, vulnerability,
anxiety and paranoia. I don't feel comfortable about my writing before ]
pass it through her. Thank you for being a part of my life and enduring me.

Kanishka Gupta—my agent. Kanishkha signed me for my first book
about ten minutes after I sent him my proposal. This is our third book
together and our relationship has only strengthened since then. He is a gem
of a person who IJ have the privilege of calling my friend.

My father—Khalid Manzoor. He told me once that writing is the
greatest thing a person could ever do. Thank you for telling me that when
I was in doubt.

My mother—Nyla Khalid, for living her dreams through me.

Neelofar Zakaria—my mother-in-law. Like a rock she has stood beside
me facing every obstacle head on and supporting her children no matter
what.

Karthik Venkatesh—my editor. This is my second book with him and
we have over the years established a relationship that goes beyond our
professional lives. He is the best editor I could have asked for, empathetic,
curious, meticulous, and receptive.

My sincere thanks to Ms. Mala Dayal for allowing us to use translations
from Khushwant Singh’s Hymns of the Gurus. Attempts were also made to
contact the owners of other copyrighted material. My apologies for the
omissions. I will correct it in future editions if brought to my notice.

My sisters, Nida and Sana, and my brothers-in-law, Umer and Shoaib,
who take immense pride in me. My uncle and aunt Javed Manzoor and
Lubna Manzoor, who have never missed a single event of mine. My friends
Usman, Ammar, AQ, Hashmi, Bash, Khurram and Ammad, who have
always loved and supported me even when we could not agree upon certain
things. My professors Furrukh Khan, Sadaf Ahmad and Marta Bolognani,
_ who continue to promote my work years after I stopped being their student,
and finally Iqbal Qasier, my Guru, without whom none of this would have

been possible.




eee iia rita a

«owt OROOKClU.cOm

14 WALKING WITH NANAK

Taxila much before the British discovered the ancient Gandhara Cities.
there were local myths and stories about a mound of dead kings,

The folk story of Baba Naulakha might not give us an accurate
account of the events in this case, but that is not what I am searching
for in this tale. It is enough for me to know that there is a reference to
Guru Nanak in the life of this saint. The fact that a Sikh author, Harish
Dhillon, claims that Mata Triptaji used to visit a Hindu temple on the
mound outside of Talwindi also reinforces my perception that Mata
probably visited this mound where there must have been a temple and
where now lie the sacred rocks of the saint.

On our way back from Shahkot, Iqbal Qaiser and I discussed if this
could have been a Hindu temple prior to becoming a Muslim shrine.
We concluded that this must have been a shrine dedicated to the Hindu
goddess, Durga. This is because in the folk story of Baba Naulakha
Hiazari it was stated that he used to ride a lion, like Durga does in Hindu
iconography. We assumed the footprint we saw on top of the mound
must have been shown to Hindu devotees as the footprint of the goddess
herself or that of her lion.

Given that the shrine was located on top of an archaeological mound
it was perhaps then an ancient temple. It must have been a sacred space
not only for Hindus but also for Muslims of the neighbouring regions.
Most of these Muslims were Hindu converts anyway, and for a lot of them
this temple must have remained important even after their conversion.
In my travels around Pakistan I have seen this phenomenon more than
once. A Hindu shrine at Ram Thamman at Kasur remained sacred for
Muslims even after Partition. The shrine of Hardo Sahari in Kasur district
also has a similar story. In Bhera, I visited a Hindu temple where Muslims
still lit lamps believing that now a Muslim saint occupied that temple.
In Lahore, I found that Muslims and Christians, whose ancestors were
once Hindus, continue to visit a Hindu temple their ancestors visited.
Perhaps the most popular example is that of the shrine of Sehwan Sharif,
one of the most important Muslim shrines in Sindh, which was once a
Hindu temple dedicated to Lord Shiva.

Similarly, it is likely that the shrine of Naulakha Hazari could have
been a Hindu temple once, which must have been sacred to Muslims as




‘
mo






www.sikhbookclub.con,

PRAISE FOR 4 WHITE TRAIL

This well-researched and engagingly-written account of Pakistan's
minorities cannot attord to be missed by anyone interested

in contemporary Pakistan. Yoginder Sikand

Beautifully written, with a historian’s craft, and human heart inside,
the author has fashioned an essential book for all those who are interested
in understanding the situation of religious minorities in Pakistan, beyond

numbers and violent news. fan? Vex:

PRAISE FOR IN SEARCH OF SHIVA

Unravelling lavers of faith hidden in Pakistan.

Devdutt Pattanaik

Khalid’s study lends hope that centuries of folk cultural traditions might

yet be saved from oblivion and provides a counter-narrative to the rigid

interpretation of history propagated by religious fundamentalists. 7/e News

Haroon Khalid introduces the reader to eye-opening religious
traditions in his home country that are rooted in the cultural beliefs
of South Asia. Mid-Day

iz 978-93-85152-99-3

7
! i Non-fiction
qi

Sean Also available
as an ebook

TRANQUEBAR
westlandbooks.in *

Habe

Lat . a
eee, ttt mummies la - Whee” pwn She gips yipeatio yA.

i aah



www .sikhbookclub.com

THE PROPHECY 15
well. After Partition as the religious divide between these two groups
became sharper, the temple was converted into a Muslim shrine to adjust
to the changing religious landscape of the country. )

In this context, it is safe to assume that Baba Naulakha Hazari
must have been one of the many Muslim ascetics who regularly visited
this temple. He must have been a Malamati Sufi, who refuse to follow
any religious order and do not distinguish between different religious
traditions. After his death he must have been buried at a little distance
from the temple and over the years a shrine must have come up around
it. After Partition, the Hindu temple vanished and this shrine became
the sole source of the religious identity of the mound.

98

The white dome of the gurdwara was visible from afar. A potholed
road led to the village. Around us were newly built houses of former
agriculturists, who had sold their lands to developers and earned millions.
Their wealth was displayed ostentatiously in their gaudily done-up houses.

“There was a lot of pressure on the Government of Pakistan from
Sikhs living in Canada, England and America to renovate this gurdwara
after my book came out,’ said Iqbal Qaiser. We were driving on the edge
of the village on a road that led straight to Gurdwara Janamasthan Bebe
Nanaki at the village of Dera Chahal. ‘It was in a horrible state when
Meraj Khalid ordered its renovation. Even then, only its external structure
was spruced up. The gurdwara remained shut to the Sikh community.
Only recently has the government allowed pilgrims to visit this gurdwara
when they come to Pakistan for festivals. Now on those occasions, prayers
are offered here. This has become a gurdwara once again.’

Malik Meraj Khalid was born in 1916 to a poor agricultural family
of this village. He worked hard to continue his education. He later joined
the Pakistan People’s Party and continued to serve it till his death. He
served twice as the National Speaker, once as the Chief Minister of
Punjab and once between November 1996 and February 1997 as the
interim Prime Minister of Pakistan. One of his first orders as the Prime
Minister was the approval of funds to renovate this historical gurdwara


Wi wy, ikhbookclub.com. ’

16 WALKING WITH NANAK

at his village. Being a son of the soil, he understood the inapors,
of this shrine, which is 60 embedded in the history of his village
though he was not Sikh. oe

[ parked the car under the shade of a peepal tree and climbed the
ain to the arte A vatron eas rN from behind the wall testifying thay
there were members of the Sikh community living ; ? aah
was a pool of water where buffaloes eae ene Behind hae

ae ; ale > the sacred
pool of this shrine. Next to it was a mosque which was being expanded

Gurdwara Bebe Nanaki is narned after Guru Nanak’s elder sioeal
According to tradition, she was born in a house that was situated where
the gurdwara now stands. Guru Nanak’s mother Mata Tripta belonged —
to this historical village of Dera Chahal, located on the Bedian road;
now flanked between DHA Phase Five, Six and Seven. Mata Tripta
came here from Talwindi before the birth of her first child as was the
tradition at the time. According to tradition, Nanak was named after
his sister Nanaki.

Since this was Nanak’s maternal home he often came here. Later,
his followers built a gurdwara here to mark the spot. When Maharaja
Ranjit Singh became the sovereign of Punjab at the end of the eighteenth
century he spent large amounts of money on the renovation and
expansion of many gurdwaras, including this one. In addition, he attached
vast tracts of land to these gurdwaras, so that the revenues from the lands
could facilitate their functioning. This was also believed to be a kind of
religious service, made mandatory by Guru Nanak himself. As long as
the Sikh community was present here, the affairs of the gurdwaras and
the property associated with them were managed by their administrative
bodies. After 1947, these buildings were abandoned and like orphans,
their properties were snatched away from them. Many gurdwaras were
taken over by refugees from the other side of the border and slowly, their
historicity eroded.

When the Evacuee Trust Property Board (ETPB) was created along
with the Augaf Department in the 1960s, it brought under its control
various neglected gurdwaras. However, in most cases official apathy and
a religious bias against these buildings resulted in further deterioration.
Newly appointed officials looked the other way as the land mafia took


Ww

ww. sikhbookclub,com

THE PROPHECY 17

over their properties, amounting to thousands of acres all across the
country.

Something similar happened in the case of this historical gurdwara.
About a year prior to our visit to this shrine I read in the newspaper
that Ghulab Singh, a Pakistani Sikh who happens to be the first Sikh
police officer in the revamped traffic police of Lahore, filed a case against
ETPB in the Lahore High Court for the alleged sale of agricultural land
associated with Gurdwara Janamasthan Bebe Nanaki. Ghulab Singh
claimed that the ETPB was illegally selling land connected to this
historical gurdwara. Just a few days before my visit, the Supreme Court
of Pakistan took cognisance of the case and after going through the
evidence asked the construction companies to pay Rupees 986 million
as surety while the hearings proceeded.

I wanted to talk to Ghulab Singh about the case. However, there
seemed to be no way of getting in touch with him. I got his mobile
number from mutual friends at Nankana Sahib, but that number
remained switched off for days. In desperation I decided to visit the
gurdwara where Ghulab Singh stays when he is in Lahore. We were now
standing at the threshold of the gurdwara hoping that he was inside.

We were led inside by a young priest named Daleep Singh. I could
see Ghulab’s official bike parked in the courtyard accompanying the
gurdwara. ‘That used to be the /angar hall (where free food is prepared
and served to those in need),’ said Iqbal Qaiser. Now it is a lawn with a
few rooms around it.

‘I am not sure if Ghulab will agree to an interview, Daleep warned
me, as we sat down in his room. ‘It is not because of the case per se. It’s
something personal. I’ll try talking to him and might be able to convince
him to do the interview. If he agrees, he can show you documents that
prove the corruption of the ETPB. Asif Hashmi (former head of the
ETPB) has earned billions in his tenure of five years,’ he added. In April
2016 Asif Hashmi was arrested in Dubai for his alleged corruption as
the chairman of the board.

‘What about the Pakistan Sikh Gurdwara Prabandhak Committee
(PSGPC)?’I asked him.

The PSGPC is another government institution, which was formed



ce

www.sikhbookclub.com,
a eeeceeieeaenee nadie te ee
18 WALKING WITH NANAK

in 1999 to look after the Sikh gurdwaras of Pakistan. Prior to its creation
the Shiromani Gurdwara Parbandakh Committee ( SGPC) based in
Amritsar used to collect offerings from these gurdwaras in Pakistan and
take them back to India. The PSGPC was created with the intention
of keeping within the country the revenue created from the gurdwaras
in Pakistan. Several people whom I interviewed at Nankana Sahib felt
that PSGPC was not representative of the Sikh community in Pakistan,
They felt that they were cronies of the government, who are also involved
in corruption themselves. ‘All of them are in on the deal,’ said Daleep.
“They required signatures of the members. For that they were provided
kickbacks. But you know now the case has gotten really interesting.
Ghulab Singh has presented the Gurdwara Act of 1925 along with his
papers. According to this act only those Sikhs who have been Sikhs for
three generations can take part in the organization of the gurdwaras,
This means that all the members of the committee would be removed,’
he said with a wink. The Gurdwara Act of 1925 was a British legislation
that firstly legally defined the Sikh identity, identifying it with the Khalsa
of Guru Gobind Singh, and also brought the control of the gurdwaras
under a Sikh body, which was before that controlled by members of the
Udasi. The Udasi sect is believed to have been founded by the eldest
son of Guru Nanak, Sri Chand. Ignored by his father when it was time
to appoint the next Guru, Sri Chand founded his own religious sect.
Throughout his lifetime he had an uneasy relationship with the rest of the
Sikh Gurus. It is alleged that some members of the PSGPC are not Sikhs
but Muslims pretending to be Sikhs at the behest of the government so
that they can be manipulated easily.

The windows of his room were open and a soft breeze blew in keeping
the temperature low. From the mosque the moulvi started a sermon,
which blared out of the loudspeakers. Behind the once-sacred pool now
occupied by buffaloes is the agricultural land in dispute in the courts.
From the window I could see a new block of apartments built recently
to cater to the growing demands of urban Lahore.

‘The intensity of the sermon increased with time and soon it was
impossible to conduct a conversation. ‘Let's go into the gurdwara,
suggested Daleep.


Www .siknbookclub.com,
THE PROPHECY ae

Walking into the shrine, Daleep bows in front of the Guru Granth
Sahib placed in a wooden Thara Sahib, while I stand next to him, unsure
of myself. Iqbal Qaiser also doesn’t bow given his Muslim background.
We sit next to the Thara Sahib and the discussion resumes.

Daleep is a well-read young man in his early thirties and is particularly
interested in the history of religion. Inside the shrine, we do not talk
about the controversy of the alleged property sold but about the origin
and development of Sikhism.

‘I believe that Nanak was influenced immensely by Islam,’ I said.
‘You should keep in mind that his time was the later fifteenth century
and the Islamic culture of the time was not that of today. It was at its
zenith. Just as an intellectual of today cannot ignore Western humanism
and liberalism, a scholar from that era could not keep his eyes closed to
the Islamic intellectual environment.’

‘T agree,’ said Daleep. ‘I would say that seventy-five per cent of Nanak’s
teachings are similar to Islam. But I would not use the word influence.
This is the eternal truth that is acquired intuitively through the guidance
of the Divine. Let me tell you something interesting. I don't leave the
gurdwara much but people come and visit me here. There is a Muslim
shrine not far from here called Peepali Pir. The guardians of that shrine
came to meet me and told me that their shrine was also as old as this
gurdwara. According to their elders, Guru | Yanak used to come to this
village often and would also visit their shrine while he was here. 1 am not
denying their claim but we have no evidence to verify their statement.
I asked them if they have any relic or object that was given to them by
Nanak but they said no. Had there been any such object I could have
confirmed whether it belonged to Guru Nanak by looking at it. As it
stands, their claim cannot be justified.’

Tt does sound likely though,’I added. ‘That was how Nanak operated.
Whenever he would visit an area he would visit its religious shrines,
Muslim, Hindu and of any other denomination and would engage in
religious discussions there. You are a religious historian and I understand
your need to verify claims. However, Iam more interested in folklore.
For me it is important that a Muslim shrine here in Pakistan claims that
Nanak used to visit their shrine and as I see it, this is a matter of pride


WALKING WIT! MANAK

8)

for them, This has ite own significance, irrespective of historical Vet acity
jriven that Partition occurred on the basis of religion arid Pakistan Was

created,’
Iqbal Qaiser was conspicuously quiet, Turning towards him | asked

‘So is this gurdwara built on the exact spot where Nanak’s maternal

family home used to be?’

Yeu, he said
I looked around the place trying to imagine what the house would

have looked like, The gurdwara was one big hall with a emall balcony

opening towards the centre of the hall from the firer floor.

‘lam also interested in the history of parallel Guru movements
along with the conventional ones. I am interested in understandiny the
dialectic between religion and politics,’ 1 said to Daleep.

“There is no politics. There was only religion. | wouldn't call them
parallel Guru movements,’ he said.

‘Sects?’

‘No. They were not sects either. | would call them anti-Guru
movements. There were several of them. Maybe Iqbal Qaiser would be

able to tell you more about them.’
“The first one was started by Sri Chand with his Udasi sect. He was

the son of Guru Nanak,’ said Iqbal Qaiser.
‘So he never accepted the Gurudom of Guru Angad Dev?’ | asked.

‘No,’ said Daleep.
“Then there was one that was started by Prithi Chand, the brother

of Guru Arjan,’ continued Iqbal Qaiser.

‘I remember that one,’ I said. ‘We visited his samadhi (tomb) a few
years ago. The shrine he built was also next to it. It's not far from here,
next to the village Heir.’

‘Really?’ asked Daleep. ‘It cannot be here. Since he wanted to rival the
authority of the Golden Temple, he would have constructed his shrine
on the route from Lahore to Amritsar.’

‘Exactly,’ said Iqbal Qaiser. “The Bedian road is the old route to
Amritsar. There is also a baradari (building or pavilion of twelve doors)
constructed by Shahjahan in that village. ‘This was constructed to
commemorate the time when the Emperor was passing through and


iww.sikhbookclub.com

THE PROPHECY 21
stopped at the village for a little while. It has been converted into a
madrassa (a Muslim educational institution). Prithi Chand’s in-laws
were from Heir which is why he came and started living here after he
rebelled against his father and brother for the Gurudom,’

‘Did the building have a pool?’ asked Daleep,

Yes,’ I said. ‘But now it has been filled.’

He asked me a few more questions about the architecture of the
structure but I could not answer the technical questions. ‘I'll email you
some of the pictures of the samadhi,’ ] promised him.

‘Do you know that one of the movements also started from this
particular gurdwara?’ said Iqbal Qaiser.
‘Really?’ asked Daleep,

Yes. It so happened that Guru Arjan asked one of his followers to
go to Lahore to bind the Adi Granth. The Kashmiri binders who used to
reside in Lahore were known for their meticulous binding. Bhai Bannu
was the name of the devotee who was assigned this job. We even visited
his gurdwara at Mandi Mangat.’

A few months previously, while driving from Bhera towards Gujrat,
we had stopped at Mandi Mangat to explore the abandoned gurdwara
built by Bhai Bannu. It was a beautiful structure with elaborate frescoes
on its walls. It was taken over by an influential landlord from the city

and he was using it as his dera (a place where men meet and socialise).

‘Bhai Bannu came and stayed at this gurdwara during his trip to
Lahore. While he was here he prepared another copy of the Adi Granth
without the Guru's permission. The Granth which was not sanctioned by
the Guru had some additional verses which the Guru rejected eventually.
That Granth was kept at the Gurdwara of Mandi Mangat till Partition,

after which it was taken to India.’

‘Is there still a group of followers who continue to recite that Granth
instead?’ I asked.

"Yes,’ said Daleep. ‘But it’s such a small number that it is negligible.
This is true for all the other anti-Guru movements. They remained
confined to a small group of followers.’

‘The conversation had prolonged our stay at the gurdwara much longer
than we had anticipated. My primary purpose was to talk to Ghulab





ee

A ay ikhbookclub.com i

22 WALKING WITH NANAK

Singh and get details about the case, but my conversation with Dale,
had also provided me with a lot of information. Daleep assured us tha) he
would try to get Ghulab to agree to the interview but remained scepric,)

We had to head down the Bedian road to visit two other shrine,
associated with Guru Nanak. This was the month of June and as 1),
heat during the day was unbearable, we had left at six in the mornin,
Our target was to finish the tour before midday and head back hom,
for lunch. We had spent about two hours here and were now behing
schedule. Abruptly ending our conversation, I reminded Iqbal Qaise;
about our itinerary and off we went to our next destination.


WALKING WITH THE GURU

I fet met goal Qaiser six years ago. He had come to my university
an Lahore 20 give 2 lecture on Sikh architecture. A few days before his
iectuse, posters were put up around the university that the author of
Historical Shrines of Pakistan wold be speaking. | read his book later and
was immensely impressed by his work Igbal Qaiser was doing what I
"Tipe book atecit according to the gurdwaras of the ten Sikh
; with Guru Nanak and ending with Guru Gobind
ee ee ern te cemmncencente the
bok, exch gra and its

Ma Pe on be a hg Soh en ay


www.sikhbookclub.com

24 WALKING WITH NANAK

I was reading a book on Guru Nanak when I met Iqbal Qaiser, Afte;
my graduation, I started to meet Iqbal Qaiser regularly, insisting that he
show me places of historical importance around the country. Most of the
places we visited were either Hindu or Sikh shrines because these Wer
the places that were in the most vulnerable states. Iqbal Qaiser insisteg
that I write about these places and thus began my career as a writer. };
has turned out that our short meeting at university has changed the
course of my life.

Over the years I have become increasingly fond of my mentor. While
his formal education was only till High School, he has read extensively
and now guides doctorate students. It would not be an exaggeration to
say that I have learned more from Iqbal Qaiser in the past few years
travelling across the country, than J did as a formal student. Our journeys
are marked by intense conversations about the history of Punjab and
particularly the Sikh religion for which I have developed a special
fascination. During our journeys we discussed Nanak and his poetry,
the subsequent Gurus, Mughal and Sikh conflicts and Maharaja Ranjit
Singh.

It was through Iqbal Qaiser that I was able to understand the Sufi
concept of murshad and mureed, teacher and student. It is believed in
the Sufi tradition that one needs to have a teacher to get education. This
concept of teacher cannot be understood through our contemporary
education system, which is about one teacher and many students. In the
Sufi scheme of things, it is a one-to-one relationship like the relationship
between Rumi and Shams Tabriz or Bulleh Shah and Shah Inayat.
Even in Nanak’s poetry there is frequent reference to the need to have
a teacher. Iqbal Qaiser has more than once said to both my family and
his that I am his spiritual son and hence more real to him than his own
son. For me, Iqbal Qaiser personified more than one relationship. He
was a father-figure whom I would call up whenever life threw something
unexpected at me. He was my best friend with whom I could share

anything under the sun. He was my travel companion, my teacher, my

muse and my mentor. Bulleh Shah used the word ‘love’ to describe his
emotion towards his teacher. Rumi does the same. I believe that in those
societies where the categorisations of the industrial world had still not


Www.sikhbookclub.com
til

eeeeemeneetne ne ee

25

WALKING WITH THE GURU

taken root, only that one word could encapsulate all these relationships
with Iqbal Qaiser that I have described above.

9

Having made the effort to drive to the edge of Lahore to visit the
Gurdwara Dera Chahal on the Bedian road, Iqbal Qaiser insisted that
we visit two more gurdwaras associated with Guru Nanak. On one of
his visits to his maternal home Nanak had visited the two places where
we were headed.

‘Do you know that the name Bedian road comes from the village of
Bedian, which is not far from here?’ asked Iqbal Qaiser, as we headed
further down the road. To our left was a hollow structure built of thin
bricks, standing on a vacant lot behind which was a government school.
On the right was an open sewer dissecting the village of Heir.

This abandoned structure was once meant to rival the religious and
political significance of the Golden Temple in Amritsar. It was built by
the elder brother of the fifth Sikh Guru, Guru Arjan, after his father,
Guru Ram Das, appointed his younger son as the next Guru as opposed
to him. He formed his own sect, referred to as an ‘anti-Guru movement’
by Daleep. He was succeeded by his son Meherban, who built a huge
shrine on the outskirts of Chunian. Meherban also wrote a version of
the Janamsakhi of Guru Nanak that describes events from his life and
is one of the primary sources for Guru Nanak’s life story.

It is interesting to note that this particular sect also drew its legitimacy
from the first Sikh Guru, Guru Nanak, claiming to be his true followers.
Sikh scholars point out various discrepancies in the Janamsakhis
attributed to Meherban. For example Meherban claims that Guru Nanak
was born in Dera Chahal and not Rai Bhoi di Talwindi which later
became Nankana Sahib. It further states that the young Guru spent his
early childhood there. Other writers of Janamsakhis and Sikh scholars
though are unanimous that Nanak was born in Rai Bhoi di Talwindi
where there are several gurdwaras marking events from his childhood.

Bedian village was occupied by the descendants of Guru Nanak
before Partition. They were called Bedi, hence Bedian. They were referred



Www w.sikhbookclub.com,

-
20 WALKING WITH NANAK

to as Bedi because in ancient times they used to recite the Vedas, fron
which they earned the title of Vedis or Bedis,’ continued Iqbal Quis,
Baba Nanak had two sons, Sri Chand and Sri Lachman. Sri Chand
became an ascetic and never married but Sri Lachman did and had
children. Baba Nanak’s lineage is therefore preserved through his younger
son. During the tenure of Maharaja Ranjit Singh, there was a man called
Baba Sahib Singh Bedi who was respected widely because of his pie
and religious lifestyle. Ranjit Singh allotted him vast tracts of land around
the cities of Gujranwala and Lahore. It was on this land that Sahib Singh
Bedi founded the village of Bedian near the city of Lahore. Here he
also founded a religious centre that would preach the teachings of Gury
Nanak. He chose this spot because he wanted to counter the propaganda
being spread by the sect founded by Prithi Chand at Heir, which as you
can see is not far from Bedian. When the British took over Punjab they
allowed the Bedi community settled here to retain their land. At the time
of Partition all of them migrated to India to be replaced by Mewatis and
Arains from Amritsar. There is also a large Christian settlement next to
this village. Before Partition, these Christians were Mazhabi Sikhs. Do
you know who Mazhabi Sikhs are? When untouchable Hindus converted
to Sikhism they were referred to as Mazhabi Sikhs just like you have
Musali and Deendar in the Muslim community.’

‘But I thought there is no concept of caste in Sikhism?’

‘Caste system also doesn’t appear in Islam but you know it exists.
The Syeds because of their direct lineage from the Prophet of Islam
hold a special place in the caste hierarchy and the Musalis and Deendars
continue to be treated as untouchable Hindus despite their conversion.
This is a cultural thing and not religious. Something similar happened
in Sikhism, where the Bedis because of their lineage from Guru Nanak
came to be considered as special people while untouchables retained
their social stigma in the form of Mazhabi Sikhs.’ |

‘Guru Nanak would have objected to this classification of castes,

I

said. ;
’ se Way > - ook +e in
‘Yes. But whenever a religion travels further away from its source
. * a fit

away from the essence of the teachings ©

terms of time, it also travels ngs
gious tradition

the source. This phenomenon can be observed in all reli


Www.sikhbookclub.com

WALKING WITH THE GURU 27

Buddha was an iconoclast, while today you have giant golden statues of
Buddha in Buddhist temples. Anyway, let me complete the story of this
village. So at the time of Partition when the Bedi Sikhs were migrating
to India they asked their servants who were Mazhabi Sikhs to stay back
and look after their property since they believed that these riots and the
division was a temporary phenomenon and sooner or later they would
return to their ancestral villages. When the riots spread to this region
and these Mazhabi Sikhs felt that their life was threatened because
of their religious identification through a beard, Airpan and turban,
they removed their turbans and cut their hair. They then converted to
Christianity which was a neutral religion at the time of Partition. The
Christians living at Bedian now are the descendants of those Mazhabi
Sikhs who served the Bedis.’

‘There must have been important Sikh shrines at the Bedian village?”
J asked Iqbal Qaiser.

‘Yes there were. I have seen the land revenue reports of that region
and learned that there were two gurdwaras inside the village while there
were a few samadhis of prominent Bedis outside the village.’

We had now reached the canal that sprouted from Bambawali-Ravi-
Bedian (BRB) and fed the area around the village of Bedian and other
regions in Kasur. The road took a T-shape here. To our right was the
historical village of Bedian and the road to the left would have taken us
to Jhaman, a border village where there is a gurdwara built in memory
of Guru Nanak’s visit to the village. On a field next to the turn, a few
women were sowing rice seeds in the marshy fields. Bending as they
moved around slowly, they were making sure that the seeds spread over

a wide area. They would remain in that position the entire day.

Should I take a right then? I would like to visit Bedian, I suggested.

The summer sun which had been tamed by the early arrival of the
monsoons was once again emancipating itself from its fetters. It was
about nine in the morning. It was still pleasant because of a gentle breeze,
but the temperature had risen considerably since morning and we could

anticipate that in a few hours it would get much worse.
‘There is nothing to see at Bedian. The gurdwaras were allotted to
the refugees who have destroyed the original structures and made new


www.sikhbookclub.com

28
2 WALKING WITH NANAK

homes for themselves, while the samadhis have also been razed. Ley
go to Jhaman instead.’ * Lets

9

of betaine srennliasenres by eucalyptus trees was beautiful,
decas y otorcyclists and rickshaws passed us. There were
yaar ert een road, which had been watered and left
; tae g. ite cranes hopped in them, searching for
insects. The musical call of the cuckoo bird wafted through the air. Shrubs
and oddly shaped trees stood comfortably around the fields. These are a
tew examples of the indigenous trees of this area which are now being
replaced by imported ones in the developed areas of Lahore. Indigenous
birds which only rest on particular trees have also had to migrate outside
the city after their natural habitats were replaced. Here, civilization in
the form of ‘development’ has not arrived and therefore one finds trees
that would have inhabited this region for centuries and still hear the
sounds that must have greeted pilgrims travelling through these regions.
Small potholes marked the road. Soon they became larger, forcing
the car to slow down considerably. The signals on our phones also started
to fluctuate before completely disappearing. Small mounds that run all
along the border appeared in front of us. Within them were plastered
bunkers with numbers painted at the entrance. These were signs of the
approaching border.
‘Why aren't these border roads ever renovated?’ I asked Iqbal Qaiser.
‘The army doesn't let the government do it,’ he replied. “This entire
region is under their control. Till sometime ago they would not even
allow farmers to till the lands which were too close to the border. That
has changed now and agricultural activities can now be found all the way
up to the zero line. However, they still don't allow much development

to take place here, especially the construction of roads, because they feel
that paved roads will facilitate the movement of enemy vehicles. What
they don't understand is that better roads would also mean that they can
move quickly as well.’

road
We took a right turn on thi na

5 road and started driving ©


WALKING WITH THE oveU ”

running parallel to the embankment with bunkers. These embankments
were constructed during the 1965 war between India and Pakistan to
ward off a tank attack from the Indian side, A small canal was also dug
under thern which once contained water with an electric current running
through it. There are three such embankments at the border.

“The art of warfare has progressed much,’ I said to Iqbal Quiser. ‘I
don't believe you need embankments or water with electricity to protect
your borders anymore,’

“Wars are now fought from rooms by pressing buttons,’ added Iqbal
Qaiser.

Driving into the village of Jhaman which is situated on a small
mound, I asked one of the locals about the way to the gurdwara. “You
mean Gurdwara Sahib,’ he asked me. ‘Keep on following this road until
it leads you out of the village. You will see the Gurdwara Sahib in front
of you.’

I was pleasantly surprised by his reference to the gurdwara as the
Gurdwara Sahib. ‘Sahib’ in the South Asian tradition is a suffix that
is used after a name to suggest respect. A majority of the historical
aras have been bestowed names which end in ‘Sahib’. For a Muslim

Pakistan to use this word of honour for an abandoned gurdwara

| about twenty kilometres from the DHA Phase V,
ct nt times. According to the Survey
en tuins here which date back to the sixth and
B. The vi age that stands today was first established
‘ rho had arrived here from the region
<-> ocr derhome man



Wiww.siknbookclub.com i

30 WALKING WITH NANAK

Since there were shards of pottery and other archaeological artefact, :

found in large numbers here, the name of the gurdwara that was buik
here later, to commemorate the visit of the Guru, became Gurdwar, |
Rori Sahib. ‘Rori’in Punjabi is used to refer to pieces of a broken utengjj _
or small rocks. Later, when these pieces of pottery were inspected by
the British it was learned that this mound was actually an ancient
archaeological mound. It was never excavated, as a splendid gurdwar,
had been built on the spot. It is believed that Nanak, along with his
companion Mardana, rested here under a tree. Nanak made a rubab for his
friend out of the branches of this tree. (The rubab is a traditional stringed
instrument which was fairly popular around the time of Nanak. ‘This
instrument has acquired a particular significance in the Sikh tradition
because of its association with Mardana, Nanak’s companion.)

As we drove into the village, I saw several remnants of historical
Aavelis (palatial houses). The structures had been wiped out but their
walls were still intact. “You should also write about this village in
connection with Bhagat Singh,’ said Iqbal Qaiser. In 1931, when the
young revolutionary Bhagat Singh, along with his comrades, Rajguru
and Sukhdev, were hung at Lahore jail, there was widespread unrest. In
order to avoid protests, the British Government banned demonstrations
in large cities, as a result of which villages became the focus of attention.
The Naujawan Bharat Sabha, the political organization of Bhagat Singh,
had an office in this village. It held a meeting here after the assassination
and a demonstration was organised, which at that time was reported to
be the largest protest rally held in India against the assassination.

The gurdwara presented itself to us as soon as we left the village. It
was asad sight. A square structure built with small bricks, on top of which
was a white dome; it was a picture of neglect. Parts of the protective wall
had crumbled, while several bricks from the structure had been robbed.
Next to it was a bunker. Behind the gurdwara was the last embankment
on the Pakistan side, beyond which lay India.

‘Have I told you the story about what happened to me the last time
I came here?’ asked Iqbal Qaiser. Without waiting for me to reply, he
continued, ‘This was in 1993. The Pakistan Rangers (who are responsible
for monitoring the India-Pakistan border) had set up a base inside this


ee ee

WALMING WITR THE GUEL 4%

building. Te cower this place they had surrounded the place with trees i
wanted to photograph the gurdwara for my book so | went up to them
and asked for permission, The officer on duty told me that he could
aot allow that and that he would have to ask his superior. The superior
was not at the post so 1 was asked to wait for him He returned after a
couple of hours, while I waited here, He did allow me to take one photo
eventually but only if | promised to follow his guidelines He told me
that 1 could only shoot from one particular angle which didn't show
much of the building. He also told me that the flag of Pakistan which
was hoisted on top of the gurdwara could not be shown.

‘The photograph for which Iqbal Qaiser had to wait for several
hours has been immortalised in his book. One can only partially see the
gurdwara behind the trees.

‘This was not my first visit to this particular gurdwara cither. | had
come here earlier, in November 2008, a few days after the Mumbai
attacks by Pakistani terrorists, as a result of which both countries were
on the brink of war. While I was exploring this area, Indian jets were

overhead, clearly violating Pakistani airspace. This issue was taken
up by Pakistani media and there were discussions about shooting down

src roy ine Pia erty an we wo red


WALKING WITH NANAK


Peas a ee

$2 WALKING WITH WAMAR

Theere were huge hades in the ground inside the gurdwars at the
place where the Thar Sahib was kept and ake around it, ly the < Tat itiey
that followed Partition, several Hindu temples and Sikh gurdwagy,
were desecrated in this manner in the search for buried treasure, Ar py
entrance, graffiti in black read, Suhhon Atiah, lhadat sirf Allah Hi hareig
and Allahu Atbar. le weat calligraphic style proved that this could ae
have been done by villagers but by professionals. Perhaps when dy
gurdwara served as the office of the Pakistan Rangers, some passionary

| i had this donc. This doesnt come as a eurprine as sing
the lelamisation of Pakistan under General Zia-ul-Haq in the eighties,
trnbesing ened comarees in the Army have increasingly started using religion;
« and discourses. This has created a breed of officers who are muck

more ardent Muslims than their predecessors.

ee aes ae Ouse Here, the herdsmen had grouped

around trying to decipher the Gurmukhi writing on the dome. The
writing was accompanied by pictures. The faces on these frescoes had
been wiped out while the bodies of the figures had been left unharmed,
Ba ak ade tel Open wo wn the shrine served a

eich argc OME aisles eriey ieee oe alec fie

So A he EH TRAP AN LE AE

AERA LLL ONE



WALKING WITH THE GURU 33

Following Nanak’s picture, there were nares of Guru Harkrishan,
Guru Ram Das, Guru Arjan Dev, Guru Gobind Singh in battle and then
Guru Gobind Singh along with his sons, Jujhar Singh and Fateh Singh.

‘Where exactly is the border?’ I asked one of the young herdsman.

‘Do you see that pole?’ he said. “That is in Pakistani territory. And
that pole behind it, the longer one, is in Indian territory.

It wasn't even a kilometre from where we were. Had Nanak rested a
few kilometres further ahead, today his shrine would have been a thriving
place. Devotees in colourful turbans and women with their hair covered
in dupattas would have been sitting here right now, reciting the Granth.
In the langar hall several more would have been eating. There would
have been an entire market town around this shrine, selling religious
paraphernalia. Various guesthouses and hotels would have been offering
cheap accommodation to pilgrims coming from regions far away. This
world existed only in my imagination. The truth was that Nanak, unaware
of the historical consequences of his action, rested on what eventually
became the wrong side of the border, and today this shrine is in shambles.

“As we descended the stairs and headed towards our car, I saw three

young men wearing pyjamas and T-shirts walking towards us. AK-47s

shoulders. “These are personnel of the Pakistan
‘to walk all across the border region throughout



34 WALKING WITH NANAK

‘l wouldn't, he spoke in stilted Urdu, with « Pashey ACCENT gy
common in areas around Lahore. | then noticed his eves, which We |
hazel in colour, another feature asaociated with the inhabtrann cof Kivi ;
Pakhtunkhwa. His brown karmeecs and a white dhor with potica dhety ag
it were neatly ironed. He had tied a cloth around his forchead Thine
was a small herd of buffaloes next to him which he was supposed te by
looking out for.

"We are from the army,’ he added. I further noticed a group of tag
and broad-shouldered Rangers lazing around on a single haar precy brevis
him. What was he doing dressed as a herdsman?

‘Members of the intelligence agencies usually live undercover jg
these border villages to monitor the activities of the locals and others
visiting,’ said Iqbal Qaiser. |

Even though they attempt to carnouflage themselves, pretending t

be a shop vendor or a buffalo herder, they are usually easily identifiable
_ The locals always know who they are and keep their distance from them
"Was he noting down the number of my car? Would he Later inform



www .sikhbookclub.com,

35

WALKING WITH THE GURU

the concept of hospitality is deeply ingrained. Such a philosophy and
an assurance that one would not go without food for long must have
developed out of this environment, which was displayed by the old man
offering us food.

Similar to what he had done at Jhaman, Nanak preferred to stay
on the outskirts of the village of Ghavindi. This is a recurrent theme
‘n Nanak’s travels. Wherever he went, he chose to stay aloof from
civilization, yet he was always close enough, that he did not completely
abandon it. This is also in tune with his philosophy that preached
moderation in religious endeavours and worldly affairs. He believed
that a human being should follow a middle course. This philosophy, like
Nanak’s monotheism, is similar to Islamic beliefs. Muhammad (PBUH)
taught that one should not spend one’s life in the wilderness as the
Eastern Christians of that time did, but to live a truly religious life, one
should engage with the world, yet take care not to get too drawn into
materialism. Such similarities between Nanak’s ideas and the teachings
of Islam led me to believe that he was aware of this concept in Islamic
thought and must have given it enough consideration to incorporate it
into his religious philosophy.

While we were passing through the village of Ghavindi, little naked
children started running in our path. Vendors attending to customers
stopped as they stared at us. For the short time that we were there it was
as if the entire life of the village had come to a halt and all attention was
fixed on us. ‘If our brief passage through this village in such a day and
age has the potential to attract so much attention, what do you think the
situation would have been at the time of Nanak?’ I asked Iqbal Qaiser,
and then without waiting for him to reply, said, ‘Nanak and Mardana
must have attracted a lot of attention. Word would have spread like fire
that two fakirs have settled outside the village.’

The carpeted road soon turned to one made of bricks. We were
heading towards a grove of /ahura (desert teak) trees, hidden in the middle
of which, away from our gaze, facing India, perhaps in longing, was the
building commemorating the spot Nanak and Mardana had sat in.

On the same trip that he visited Dera Chahal and Jhaman, he came
here and then left for Sultanpur, which is now on the Indian side of the



“tussikhbookciyp Com.
£Om,

$f) WALKING WITH NANAK

border, It is widely believed that it was in Sultanpur that the religioy
life of Nanak began, which inspired him to travel in all four direction,

. ‘
along with his Muslim companion, Mardana, from Rai Bhoi di Talwind;

Nanak first travelled east, going all the way to Bengal. He then
travelled south, going to the island of Sri Lanka. Back in Talwindi, he
then headed north, which included the regions of Kashmir, Nepal and
Tibet. Upon his return he decided to go west to Mecca and returned
to settle at Kartarpur. Nanak covered most of this distance on foot and
this took him about twenty-four years.

It was after the return from his trips to the East and South tha
Nanak decided to visit his sister, Nanaki, at Sultanpur, for which he
travelled from Nankana, stopping at Dera Chahal, Jaman and Ghavind;,

‘The brick road was replaced by a road filled with sharp stones that
threatened my car tyres. This was a clear indication that we were close
to the border. 1 parked the car and Iqbal Qaiser and I completed the rest
of the journey on foot.

‘The gurdwara was a lone white structure with a dome on top. Inside
were two plinths meant to represent the seats of Guru Nanak and Bhai
Mardana. Nanak’s was higher than Mardana’s. Placed on top of them
were packets of salt and on the floor there were straws of sweep.

‘Do you know what this means?’ Iqbal Qaiser asked me. ‘It means
that the locals still come here. They bring salt for a special prayer whereas
straw from a sweep is used to get rid of black magic.’ The neighbouring
village of Ghavindi was once dominated by Hindus and Sikhs. ‘The
demographics have changed after Partition. Who then was still praying
at this shrine?

When we visited this shrine in 2008 after our visit to Jhaman, Iqbal
Qaiser and I spotted a well next to this building. This time, we searched
for the well but it was nowhere to be found. ‘In just five years it has
disappeared,’ said Iqbal Qaiser.

‘How long do you think this building will last?’ I asked.

‘By the looks of it, not very long.’ .

Facing the building was a bunker for the Rangers, while next to
was a small mound that had within it the remains of the other buildings

constructed around this shrine.
We drove back to the village of Ghavindi from where we were ©


re

Www. sikhbookclub.com

WALKING WITH THE GURU 37

head to Lahore. Iqbal Qaiser made me stop in front of a wall made of
thin bricks while the rest of the structure was made with thicker ones.
A green board next to it pointed out that this building belonged to the
government's Department of Union Council.

“This was the gurdwara built in memory of Nanak,’ said Iqbal Qaiser,

sinting towards the building. Nanak and Mardana stayed at the spot we
just visited but a gurdwara was also built within the village. Nothing but
this wall remains of it now, he said. I drove past the blue metal gate of the
building and sneaked a look inside. The structure had been divided into
several houses. There were newly plastered walls and recently renovated
rooms. All traces of the gurdwara had been erased.

As we moved away from the border region, our mobile phone signals
reappeared and Iqbal Qaiser’s phone started to ring incessantly. Later,
L asked him about the story of Nanak’s visit to Ghavindi. Putting his
phone down, he began narrating the story.

as

Walking from Jhaman, Nanak decided to rest for a little while, next to a small
settlement of gypsies. He was on his way to Sultanpur where he wanted to
visit his sister, brother-in-law and his friend Nawab Daulat Khan Lodhi.
He came and sat under the shade of a grove of lahura trees. Nanak was a
naturalist. He regarded the beauty of the world to be a manifestation of the

Divine. For example, he says:

The sky the salver, the sun and moon the lamps,
The stars studding the heavens are the pearls
The fragrance of. sandal is the incense

Fanned by the winds all for Thee

The great forests are the flowers.

What a beautiful aarti is being performed

For you, O Destroyer of, fear?

Taken fom: Harish Dhillon, The First Sikh Spiritual Master: Timeless Wisdom
from the Life and Teachings of Guru Nanak (Woodstock, VT: SkyLight Paths

Pub., 2006), page 89



www .sikhbookclub.com,
‘Winememrenrstinenmenateinneiaiemsntnntenneriens

38 WALKING WITH NANAK

Do you understand what Nanak is trying to say here? Nanak is
the act of performing of aartis within Hindu temples. He is trying
God doesn't reside just in temples, mosques or shrines, but in naty
is saying that when God resides everywhere why should we, as AeVotey,
limit our aarti to temples? The entire world is our temple and Ver ythin i
nature is performing the act of aarti. But all this talk is a disty,

action from
our story. I was telling you about Nanak’s visit to this forest on th

€ Outsking,
of the village of Ghavindi.

Nanak and Mardana stopped here for a little while.
meditated, Mardana said that he was hungry. Nanak told hi
small village nearby, where a child has been born to a
the family was celebrating its birth.

‘Go there and get some food for yourself,’ he instructed Mardana. One
thing that I find fascinating in the Janamsakhis is that Nanak is Stripped
of all his human characteristics. He is depicted as a saint who never gets
hungry, feels tired, cold, hot, etc. Bhai Mardana on the other hand is prey ty
these human weaknesses and throughout their Journeys he is the one who feels
homesick, tired, hungry, etc. I also feel that in the Janamsakhis Nanak and
Mardana are probably used as symbols for religious and worldly life, where

Nanak depicts the former and Mardana the latter. Nanak is above all worldly
needs, whereas Mardana is engaged with the world and that often gets him
into trouble. Anyway, where was I? Yes. So Mardana went to the village to
get some food for himself. More importantly, Nanak instructed Mardana not
to beg for food and that he should partake of it only if offered by the family
without having asked.

So Mardana reached the village where the festivities for the first born
son were in full flow. He stood next to the mendicants and beggars who were
also waiting for the celebratin 1g family to offer them some food. But so lost was
the family in its jubilation that it forgot to give them food. Mardana was
under orders not to ask so he returned empty-handed and complained about
the situation to Nanak. In the meantime, the child whose birth they were
celebrating died by an act of God. Soon the celebration turned into mourning.
It was then that the family realised why the curse of God had fallen upon
them. Ta make up for their mistake they approached Guru Nanak and asked

for his forgiveness. There is a poem in the Guru Granth Sahib that records
what Nanak said to the villagers on that occasion.

Crit Ic isin $
to SQY thy,
re. Nay, ah |

W, hile Nana} :
m there was 9
particular family ang


WW wy ikhbookclub.corm
WALKING WITH THE GURU 9

98

In the first watch of the night, O my merchant friend,

You were cast into the womb, by the Lord's ¢ Yommand

Upside-down, within the womb, you performed penance, O my merchant
I riend,

And you prayed to your Lord and Master,

You uttered prayers to your Lord and Master,

While upside-down, and you meditated on Him with deep love and
affection.

You came into this Dark Age of Kali Yuga naked,

And you shall depart again naked. As God's Pen has written on your
forehead,

So it shall be with your soul.

Says Nanak, in the first watch of the night, by the Hukam of the Lords
Command,

You enter into the womb.

In the second watch of the night, O my merchant friend,

You have forgotten to meditate.

From hand to hand, you are passed around, O my merchant friend,
Like Krishna in the house of Yashoda.

From hand to hand, you are passed around, and your mother says,
This is my son.

O my thoughtless and foolish mind, think:

In the end, nothing shall be yours.
You do not know the One who created the creation.

Gather spiritual wisdom within your mind.
Says Nanak, in the second watch of the night, you have forgotten to

meditate. ;
In the third watch of the night, O my merchant friend,

Your consciousness 15 focused on wealth and youth.
You have not remembered the Name of the Lord, O my merchant friend,

Although it would release you from bondage.
Vou do not remember the Name of the Lord, and you become confused by

Maya.



¥

Www sikhbookclub.com
40 WALKING WITH NANAK

Revelling in your riches and intoxtcated with youth, you waste your
uselessly. He
You have not traded in righteousness and Dharma;
You have not made good deeds your friends.

Says Nanak, in the third watch of the night, your mind is attached ii

wealth and youth.

In the fourth watch of the night, O my merchant friend,

The Grim Reaper comes to the field.

When the Messenger of Death seizes and dispatches you, O my merchan,
friend,

Ne one knows the mystery of where you have gone.

Se think of the Lord!

No one knows this secret,

Of when the Messenger of Death will seize you and take you away.
All your weeping and wailing then is false. In an instant,

You become a stranger.

You obtain exactly what you have longed for.

Says Nanak, in the fourth watch of the night, O mortal,

The Grim Reaper has harvested your field.

8

Leaving the forlorn parents and other family members of the deceased
child, Nanak and Mardana moved towards their next destination,
Sultanpur Lodhi, where both of them had spent several years. The city
is a hundred-odd kilometres from this gurdwara, a journey of a couple
of hours by car. Today, heavily weaponized armies guard the border on
both sides, making sure that a journey that Nanak and Mardana took at
that time is no longer possible. Sultanpur Lodhi is now in India.

$Guru Nanak, English translation by Dr Sant Singh Khalsa MD, Guru Grant
Sahib, www.srigranth.org, pages 74-78, http://www.srigranth.org/ servlet a
surbani?Action=Page&Param=748¢g=8h=O8r=18ct=18-p=08ck-O829-


AN ENCOUNTER WITH DIVINITY

The call of the muezzin pierced the sky. Almost on cue, the colour of the
sky changed from a harmless blue into a burning pink. The last streaks of
the sun petered out and the sky turned a barren black. Emerging from his
thoughts, Nanak observed the birds coming back to their nests ready to
feed the young ones who had been waiting the entire day. Sitting under
this waan tree, whose canopy-like protection covered him from the cruel
sky, he too longed for his family. A labyrinth of branches surrounded
him. On some of them he noticed pieces of cloths tied as supplication.
His home was about two furlongs from here (about half a kilometre), yet
he sat in the company of these holy branches, as an unwelcome guest,
wondering how to return home to the embrace of his mother and sister.

From another section of the town the sound of a bell tolling could be
heard distinctly. Nanak picked up the beat of a bass drum accompanying
it. In a Hindu temple it was time for the evening prayers which would
include the singing of bhajans.

How come mosques and temples, Hindus and Muslims, have such
differences when they both engage in worship in a similar manner, at the
same time, whose testimony is also furnished by nature, Nanak wondered
to himself. Why do Muslims complain about Hindus singing bhajans at
the time of their azaan when they too insist upon making their call for
prayers when nature is in the act of worship? Is it not all the same? The
entire world, all its experiences, converging towards a focal point. Divinity.



Ww A Vv Vv

“3! khbookclub.com

BY THE SAME AUTHOR

A White Trail: A Journey into the Heart of Pakistan’s Religious Minorities
In Search of Shiva: A Study of Folk Religious Practices in Pakistan


WWW. Sl knbookclub.com |

42 WALKING WITH NANAK

| Is the chirping of the birds also not a call of prayer? Is the }

of a song not an act of worship? Is working in the burning hot fn t
summer to supply children with food not a supreme act of ies h
Why then does divinity need to be divided and distributed ite.
(blessings) and prasad only from temples and mosques? whe
divinity be found in the smile of an infant or the fear of a calf se he,
from its mother? Is divinity not present in the multifarious colotiyof a
world—the starving sadhu, the overfed Brahmin, the lecherous m ra
innocent giggle? Is this also not an act of divinity, the way two ‘ifs
sounds of different origins merge to become one with the Supreme On

Years later, Nanak composed a poem which gave words to Fe
emotions he had experienced sitting under this tree:

All the sounds we hear are but a part of the mighty roar of Thy torrent
All the sights we see are but a part of Thy vast creation, |
Thou art the taste

Thou art the fragrance

O mother of mine! no other hath these qualities.

My Master is One

He is One, brother, the only One.*

Tears streamed down his cheek. This was followed by a feeling o!

ng from within Nanak’s soul. He too was part of divinity.
all connected to

hich every

happiness risi
His body, the soul, the tired legs and the weary eyes,

the cosmos; every movement of his, part of a divine plan, in w
element of nature was incorporated. He noticed how the crying of the
birds became his voice in the form of a single tear shed. He knew that
far away his mother felt his pain. He had not shed tears in vain. He rose
to go home, to face the consequences of his actions. a

‘If this is what is ordained for me then I should not try to avoid it
he thought to himself. He rose to his feet and felt an unusual weakness
in his knees. His head touched the canopy of the overarching tree. As
soon as he got up, he sat down again, feeling the weakness in his feet
He almost fell to the ground as he lost control over his legs.

‘Khushwant Singh, fails Hymns of the Gurus (New Delhi: Viking, 2003), pase a


Weres, 2
ENDO OK CIs com,

AN ENCOUNTER WITH DIVINITY 43

His mind wandered off to the encounter earlier in the day with the
naked ascetics in the jungle of Chuhrkhana. The lessons imparted by
their old teacher resonated in his rnind. He thought about the concept
of purity of the body.

‘The human body is a piece of art, whose creator is the Sole Creator.
Look at your fingers and the protruding veins at the back of your hand.
Have you noticed how your stomach churns when someone tickles your
feet or how there is a strange sensation in your chest when you dip a
finger in your navel? The human body is the ultimate machine and is in
a state of perfection. You compose verses, don't you, young boy? How
would you feel if ] were to alter your words? How would a painter feel if
someone smears more colours on a completed picture? The human body
also works in the same manner. God doesn’t want us to make changes
in His art. Our bodies are beautiful as they are. We don’t need to wear
fancy clothes or jewellery, or cut our hair, or remove our lice to become
beautiful. Our purity lies in our “imperfection”. We were born naked
and naked we will be when we are cremated. Why then do we in our
journey through life corrupt our bodies with needless ornamentation?’

The concept of the purity of the human body had touched a chord
within Nanak. He could not summon any arguments to counter the
leader of the ascetics. He had decided a few years earlier that he would
incorporate any point of view into his philosophy if he could not counter
it with an argument. On the other hand he was willing to shed any
established tradition or belief system if he could not find within himself
a rational reason for it. This is why, when his father and the local priest of
Rai Bhoi di Talwindi suggested that he take up the sacred thread (anew)
to purify his body and differentiate his caste from lower ones, he refused
to do so. Later, he would compose a poem which explained his reasons
for defying this ancient holy tradition.

From the cotton of compassion,

Spin the thread of contentment,

Give knots of continence and twists of Truth;

This is the sacred thread of the soul—

Tf thou hast one such, O Brahma, then put it on me.


Wwww.sikhbookclub.com

44 WALKING WITH NANAK

It will not snap, nor sotl; nor will it be burnt or lost
Blessed is the man, O Nanak,

Who wears such a thread around his neck.

and Kshati forcennuris caused afore ee i
; ) sed a furore in the traditional so¢; |
this small town. Respectable Hindus started to avoid the Bed; a o
causing much grief to Nanak’s father. Nanak held himself res aa |
and slipped further into melancholy. pony
cog ere tan cing iii,
ope S, and » Nanak wondered. It was ay
appealing idea given his state of mind. But then the face of his moti |
and sister formed in his head and he began challenging the idea. Would
it be much more spiritually difficult and hence rewarding if one i
to tread the path of piety while engaging with the world?
‘This was not the first time that these thoughts had come to his mind,
He had been grappling with the idea since his childhood. Often when |
he would visit the mound outside of Talwindi he would ask Hindu yogis |
and Sufi dervishes this question but he had yet to receive a satisfactory
answer. He was pulled towards the reasoning of his mentor Sayyed
Hassan, a Muslim Sufi, who lived near his house. He was told that it _
was unacceptable to repudiate social life in search of religiosity. Sayyed
Hassan would often condemn the Sufi mendicants who would roam —
around wearing tattered clothes, living on the generosity of people.
‘Islam teaches one to adopt the middle path,’ he would argue. ‘The
Quran says that one should not seek Allah in abandoned caves and
jungles but one should instead live as a member of society so that a
believer is able to inspire others around him.’ At a young age, Nanak was
exposed to the philosophy of his Muslim mentor and hence the idea of
naked ascetics abandoning the world for a life in the jungle disgusted
him. Repulsed as he was, he was nonetheless impressed by some of thet
‘deas. Besides the concept of the purity of the body he also appreciat’
that unlike other ascetics these naked yogis did not beg for food.


www ssikhbookclub, com

AN ENCOUNTER WITH DIVINITY 45

The chirping of the birds died down and night subdued the activities
in the town. Across the city lay Nanak’s home where his mother, Mata
Tripta, sat in front of her pantheon of Hindu deities, praying for her
son’s safe return. Her husband, Mehta Kalu, was pacing up and down the
courtyard with his hands held behind his back. Nanak had left home in
the morning after his father had given him the hefty amount of twenty
rupees to visit the market town of Chuharkhana about twelve kos ( forty-
five kilometres) from here and purchase something worthwhile to trade.
The eighteen-year-old Nanak should have returned by now. Nanak’s sister,
Bebe Nanaki, brought her anxious father a glass of hot milk mixed with
almonds. She knew better than her mother that underneath the anger
her father was actually worried about the safety of his son.

“This boy cannot do anything right, grumbled Mehta Kalu as he took
the bronze tumbler from his daughter and sipped the milk.

‘He will be alright, Bapuji. He is a very sensible person, Bebe Nanaki
defended her brother.

‘What sensible? Is it sensible to not return home after the sun has
gone down? You know well enough how dangerous these jungles are. I
am sure that he is once again in the company of those no good ascetics
discussing useless things. What does he find in them? Look at all the
other boys of his age. Nawarang was born around the same time as
Nanak. He has now completely taken over his father’s cloth business.
Rajat on the other hand, has started maintaining the accounts for his
family's vast agricultural lands. Bebe Nanaki, you know we don’t have
vast agricultural lands or a thriving business. | am an accountant. It’s not
a hereditary occupation. What will happen after I die?’

‘Don't say such things, Bapuji. Please!

‘Nanak needs to take up a trade, a profession. I know you and your
mother think that I am unduly harsh upon him but one day you will
realise how important this training is for him. He cannot be a buffalo
herder for the rest of his life. It is below his status. We are Bedis. We are
the ancient orators of the Vedas. Is this how we want to pay tribute to

the memory of our forefathers?’
Mehta Kalu handed back the empty tumbler to his daughter and
laughed sarcastically. ‘How can Nanak bring shame to our family


as WALRIMG WITH MAMeR

by becoming a buffalo herder? To be honest he CBRNE evER dy,
Remember when I: once asked him to look after oor buPuloey: he
asleep and the animals entered the feids of Raj Kamar. Had Rai Bass .
net intervened in time and agreed to pay the amount host, WE wrens 3
suffered a major loss.”

‘But father. you have to understand. Our Nanak is not like a
people. He is sensitive and obserwant. He thinks and talks bout topic,
that ordinary people cannot even fathom, said Bebe Nanaki.

‘All sisters think their brother is special and all mother shi
their child is special,” he replied mockingly. ‘Nanak has extraordenge,
intellect but he needs to use his intellect in practical matters. Hom wi
he survive in a world like this if he continues to talk about sci ritealie:
and metaphysical matters all the time? He needs to lear accounts and
other things which would be useful for him to make a living. How wi
he make a living from religion”

Finishing her praver Mata Tripta emerged from the room. ‘Nauk

go get an carthen-pot from the kitchen and fetch water from the wel
There is no water in the house forthe night’ As Bese Nansks Lt Mics
Tripta asked her husband, ‘Any news of Nanak”

‘No, nothing yet.’

‘There was 2 knock on the door. Mehta Kalu rushed to it and opened
it to find a young boy, slightly older than Nanak, standing outsade the
door. “We've found Nanak,’ he said. “He is hidden in the growe of wax
trees outside town.’

“But why is he hiding” Mehta Kalu asked and without waiting 2
an answer headed out of the house. He called his emplover and frienc.
Rai Bular, and together they left to get Nanak.

They found Nanak sitting under the trees sobbing softly. His wie
clothes were covered in mud. Mehta’ initial thought was that Nanak hat
been robbed on the way. Rai Bular, who had been fond of pious Nasak
for a long time gently placed his hand on top of the boy's head and asket
‘What happened, son? Why didn’t you return home?’

‘Because | am afraid of Bapuji.”

“Why are you afraid of me” asked Mehta, his voice rising im ang

‘Please, Mehta. Let me talk to him,’ intervened Rai Bular, aware ©
the complicated relationship berween father and son.

Mtn


AN ENCOUNTER WITH DIVINITY ”

‘Why are you afraid of your father? Have you done anything wrong”

‘| have done nothing wrong,’ replied Nanak. ‘In fact, | have done a
good deed. But I know that what I have done will not please my father
| have disappointed him, which is not a good deed. 1 am confused about
this relationship between good and bad.’

"What good have you done?’

‘As you know, Bapuji gave me twenty rupees to do an honest trade
this morning and | headed towards the market of Chuharkhana. There
is a jungle on the way which | am sure you have seen many times. In the
jungle I came across a strange sight. There were a group of ascetics lost in
mediation. They were naked, all of them. They had matted hair falling on
both sides of their shoulders. Their leader was a wise man called Santrain.
I knew that I should not stop and that I should continue my journey and
complete the responsibility that my father had given me. I knew that if
| stopped I would engage in a philosophical discussion with them and
then I would lose track of time. Yet, I still couldn't help myself. It was a
strange sight indeed. Some of them were standing on their heads, while
there was one resting in a meditative pose inside the recesses of a banyan
tree, So lost were they in their thoughts that they did not even realise |
was passing by. I walked up to their leader and asked them about their
beliefs. They belonged to a group which refers to itself as Nirbani. The



Wi W.sikhbookclub.com
teen A |

AR WALKING WITH NANAK

Chuharkhana for that. There are plenty who pass through 7
would ask them. Where did the money go?’

‘I tried giving the money to Santrain but he refused, He Said thay,
Was against his religion to take money. He told me that if] Wanted to lg
them I should buy them food instead. So when I reached Chuharkhan,
instead of buying profitable goods I bought food for the ascetics and
ted them. That was my honest trade.’ Mehta Kalu could not COntro|
his temper and despite the presence of Rai Bular, whom he respected
immensely, slapped Nanak, An already shaken Nanak started to cry,

‘Mehta! ‘shouted Rai Bular. ‘Control yourself! This is no Way to trea
a grown-up man.

‘A grown-up man doesn’t go around wasting his father’s money,
He earns his own, Since this was the hard-earned income of his father
he found it easy to give it away to the ascetics. | would love to see him
do that with his own money, given that he chooses to earn someday, |
cannot believe my misfortune. waited so long for a son, a successor,
Had I known that this was how he was going to turn out, I would never
have spent those nights in prayer and given all those gifts to the temple
in hope of a son. I would have lived my life without any male progeny
and instead allowed my lineage to fade away. With the direction that
this young man has taken, our lineage is already threatened.’

‘If Nanak pains you so much then why don't you allow me to adopt
him as my son? From today, you are relieved of all of your responsibilities
as his father. He is my son now, said Rai Bular.

The relationship between father and son deteriorated further after
this incident. Even though they lived in the same house, they never
spoke. Nanak became increasingly aloof from his family and started to
spend more time at the abandoned mound on the outskirts of Talwindi.
Soon after, Nanak’s only supportive family member, his sister, also got
married and moved to Sultanpur. This further alienated father and son.

Seeing the condition of her brother, who was lost within himself, and
would not take any interest in the house or in any profession, Nanak’

alwing:

"This incident is known as Sacha Sauda (honest trade) and is one of the most
important events from Nanak’s early life.


www. sikhbookclub.com

AN ENCOUNTER WITH DIVINITY 49

ister, on a visit to Talwindi, suggested that he get married. At this point,
Nanak was spending all his time in the jungles around the city and Bebe
Nanaki felt that with the responsibility of a wife, he would spend time
at home. When she broached the topic with her mother she too felt that
this was a good idea. Bebe Nanaki had already identified a girl. Her name
was Sulakhni and she was the daughter of Moolchand Khatri from the
village of Pakhoke near Gurdaspur.

Bebe Nanaki had interacted with the young girl and had found
her to be well-suited to take up the role of daughter-in-law at the Bedi
household. She was respectful towards the elderly and knew about her
responsibilities as a woman.

Mehta Kalu too was thrilled by the proposal. When Nanaki talked
to Nanak about the marriage proposal, he accepted it quietly. It was not
as if Nanak was eager to marry. He simply couldn't think of any other
option. He was inclined towards spirituality and was attracted towards
asceticism but he did not want to live the life of a celibate, like them. He
knew that he wanted to continue to engage with society and so thought
that a marriage would be a step in the right direction.

The proposal was then extended to Sulakhni’s family by Bebe Nanaki
and they accepted it immediately. They knew that the Bedi family was
a respected family and that their daughter would be protected in their
house. Marriage dates were decided by the priests and a modest ceremony
was organised.

Marriage had the desired effect on Nanak and he started to spend
much more time at home than he did earlier. He would continue to
meet the ascetics and Sufis on the outskirts of Talwindi, but there was
moderation in his behaviour now. The relationship between father and
son also improved slowly as Sulakhni acted as a bridge between the two.
Soon after their marriage the young couple was blessed with a son who
was named Sri Chand. Nanak had never been happier in his life. Mehta
Kalu started believing that Nanak was now completely cut off from the
spiritual matters.

One day when Bebe Nanaki and her husband, Jai Ram, were visiting
Talwindi from Sultanpur, Mehta Kalu broached the topic of Nanak’s

profession with his son-in-law, who was well established in his job in



NIRS es

ny

A ~ fe .
Mndthiendantue eT

we

WALES WITH RANAK

the court of Nawal Daular Khan, the Governor of Sultana hel ‘
miggested that Nanak be allowed to came with thers te Sultanpur Rey
be would find him a reasonable job. Tripta and Mehta Kaly wer Z
by the suggestion. Never before in the histor, of the Bedi fami...
# wm lived with his caster after tarriage, but they eventually gon
because never before had a ton like Nanak taken birth in the Bedi fang
Nanak, after the birth of his first child was aleo much MOTE swage oly
tesponsibilities, which is why he readily agreed to acc ompany his snes
and brother-in-law to Sultanpur. Here, his brother-in- law got him ‘ i ‘
with the Governor of Sulranpur as a manager of the Nawah's PtOVItiag
store. Nanak enjoyed his new responsibilities,
Soon he was joined there by his wife and first son, A Year af.
Sulakhni moved in with Nanak at Sultanpur, they were blessed wig
another son, whom they named Lachman Das.

| 8 .
Sebel Gabby I Geel chat after the incident of Sache Sauda, you
Nanak must have been in a lot of anxiety,’I said, glancing at my olde
compan 1 as T navigated the car through the rush of this market tow

thos;

is



Pe

ere “
Www sikhbookclub.com,

AN ENCOUNTER WITH DIVINITY 5]

living in a sister's house and a husband living in the house of his wife is
the same as a dog”.’

‘But then Nanak was someone who challenged religious and social
boundaries. Do you think living with his sister was another way in which
he mocked social convention?’

‘Even if that was the case one can imagine that the people of those
times must have said terrible things and that must have bothered Nanak.
He was after all a part of society.’

Iqbal Qaiser is someone who is all too familiar with being mocked as
useless. His father was a businessman and a disciplinarian. When during
the Zia era his business started to suffer due to the economic sanctions
placed on the military regime, he forced his eldest son, Iqbal Qaiser, to
quit his studies and join the business.

‘I was put in charge of accounts,’ Iqbal told me once while laughing
at the memory. ‘Something happens to me when I see numbers. ‘They
start jumping around the page. I would always make mistakes. Eventually,
my father kicked me out of the business. For years I felt worthless. Even
today, none of my family members take me seriously. My opinions are
conveniently ignored. I am too much of an idealist, I am told.’

Till the time of her death, Iqbal Qaiser also had a bitter relationship
with his wife, who was constantly troubled by his interests. She was
bothered by his unorthodox religious views. To her, Iqbal Qaiser was
a Sikh. Once when he put up a poster of Nanak in his room, his wife
immediately took it down thinking that it would be a sin to have a picture
of a Sikh saint in a Muslim household.

I too have gone through similar incidents of being labelled a
Sikh or biased against Muslims, because of my fascination with Guru
Nanak. Often, my family members, my students and my friends say in
a derogatory manner that I am a Hindu or a Sikh, implying that I was
somehow inferior to them. My mother and sisters have told me several
times to write about Muslim saints and buildings instead of our Sikh
or Hindu heritage. In a country where everyone is researching Islam,
it seems there is no space to do any research outside the fold of Islam.

Following his failure in business, Iqbal Qaiser dabbled in literature

and history. Today, he is the author of fifteen books, a majority of


Wve Ww. SikKNDOOkClub.com
TT Rea Rteesnneaal

WALKING WITH NANAK

Haroon Khalid


4

Vi VW

52 WALKING WITH NANAK

which are of Punjabi poetry. His most celebrated work is Historica] Sig
Shrines in Pakistan. This book brought him international acclaim a. :
was popular with expatriate Sikhs living in America and Canada. "

‘Imagine, had you never written, you would have spent your entir
life thinking that you were not capable of doing anything,’ I said.

‘Yes,’ he concurred. Sighing deeply, he raised his head only slight),
throwing his shoulders back. He was a proud man and wished that his
father could see this aspect of his son's achievements. And then suddenly
his shoulders dropped again and he stared at the ground, not willing to
be disturbed at this moment. His father still doesn’t hold his ‘kind’ of
work in much regard. For him the world of business and money is the
only correct use of one’s time.

We drove over a small bridge. A canal teeming with water trying to
escape its banks flowed under us. It was the monsoon season and the
rains had arrived early this year. There were potholes on the road, full
of water. I drove carefully around them, trying to avoid splashing water
on the people walking and riding on cycles or motorbikes on the side
of the road. This also being Ramzan, there were several fruit vendors on
both sides of the road, selling overpriced fruit to reap the full benefits
of this holy month under their makeshift tents. The market was busy.

‘Do you know the name of this market? asked Iqbal Qaiser.

‘Farooqabad.’

Yes. That is the new name. Do you know its historical name?”

‘No.’

‘Chuhrkhana.’

‘Really?’I looked around once again as if trying to spot its historicity
amidst its busyness. It couldn’t have been very different when Nanak
visited this place. There must have been similar makeshift tents selling
lentils, sugar, vegetables and other goods on this road,

“This is still a mandi,’ said Iqbal Qaiser.

‘How far is it from Nankana Sahib’

"Well, if you go in a straight line it’s not that far. About forty-
five kilometres, I think. Do you know how it came to be called
Farooqabad?”

‘No.’



www.sikhbookclub.com

AN ENCOUNTER WITH DIVINITY 53

‘During the Zia era, there
happened to be a resident of t
Parliament when we had non-

was a man called Farooq Dogar who
his town. He was elected Member of
party based elections in the eighties. In
the assembly, he supported the military dictator. While in office, he was
killed over a personal feud and the name of this town w

Chuhrkhana to Faroogabad in his honour’
‘What does Chuhrkhana mean?’ | asked him.

‘Traditionally there were two bangles that were worn with regular
bangles. One of them was worn at the start while the other at the end.
Those two bangles were known as Chuhr. This is a Sanskrit word which
means to lead. Take a left from here, he said pointing towards a horrible
road that was covered with slushy mud. Muttering a silent prayer, I
turned left.

At a little distance from the main road, was the Gurdwara Sacha
Sauda. It was a splendid structure, recently renovated. All around it there
was a protective wall covered with barbed wire on top. I was about to turn
in the direction of the gurdwara when Iqbal Qaiser asked me to keep
driving straight. We drove next to the wall of the structure. I thought
Iqbal Qaiser was taking me to the rear gate of the gurdwara but when the
boundary wall ended, I turned towards him with a puzzled expression.

“We will come here on the way back. Let us go see Gurdwara

Sachkand first.’

as changed from

98

| It is believed that Nanak was sitting in the forest when a trader passed him.
His mules were laden with goods. ‘What is it that you carry?’ asked Nanak.
| The trader, anticipating evil intentions behind the question replied, ‘You mean
| this? Oh this is nothing. Just some mud.’

Mud, is it? Must be mud if you say so,’ said Nanak.

The truth was he was carrying sugar and other sweets. It so happened that
when he reached his destination he found out that his sugar and gur (jaggery)
had turned into mud. He understood what had transpired, so he returned to
the Guru who was still sitting there and repented. In this way his mud became
Sugar and gur once again.


www.sikhbookclub,cor a
Ph add lh) Dhani

WALKING WITH NANAK

cic

The story of Sachkand and Sacha Sauda seem to merge with each
other. The former, it seems, is an extension of the latter. Even though
the Janamsakhis relate them as two different incidents, I have no doy}
that his devotees saw the story of Sachkand as an extension of Sach,
Sauda. Needless to say, it is impossible to determine the historicity of

54

either event.

ssf

Iqbal Qaiser and I stopped in our tracks when we saw a dog resting in
front of us. It was a white dog while another brown one slept next to
it. Behind it was the Gurdwara Sachkand, a white structure. ‘Allah’ was
clumsily inscribed on it with charcoal. The white dog stared at us for a
little while and went back to sleep. ‘They looked harmless enough but
we were still scared to go through.

‘Oh, this is a new development,’ said Iqbal Qaiser. “The gurdwara
has become a shrine.’

‘It wasn't the case, the last time you came?’ I asked.

‘No.’

‘Let’s go inside. The dogs won't do anything,’ I suggested.

‘No. Let’s wait here for someone else to come.’

I stood there wondering how long it would take for another soul
to emerge to release us from this dilemma but it wasn't long. Within
the next few minutes a motorcycle stopped next to our car. One of the
occupants walked towards us while the other disappeared into the fields
around the shrine, perhaps to relieve himself.

‘Assalamualikum, he said. He was an old man who must have been
in his late sixties or early seventies. He was wearing golden spectacles
while his moustache and hair were jet black, recently dyed. ‘I have com¢
here to see Sheikh Saad. I am the brother of his father-in-law. I have
been told that he is often found at this shrine. He smokes up here.’

‘Let’s go in together and find out where he is, suggested Iqbal Qaiser.

We walked carefully around the dogs, who were unperturbed by out


Wrenie Gio
W-sikhbookclub.com,
AN ENCOUNTER WITH DIVINITY 55

resence. Next to them, facing the white gurdwara was the grave of the
Muslim saint whose shrine this abandoned gurdwara was now on the
way to becoming. The grave, situated under the shade of a tree, was made
of mud and covered with glittery shawls. There was a boundary around
t made out of bricks to maintain the sanctity of the place. Next to the
grave were a few rooms which looked recently constructed. There was
no sign of activity within those rooms.

‘Come in straight,’ instructed a voice from behind the gurdwara.

There were a group of people sitting on a mat. There were several
trees around us. This was a shady spot. We took off our shoes and joined
these men who were serving the shrine of the Muslim saint.

Before Iqbal Qaiser and I could introduce ourselves, the man
accompanying us who was in search of Sheikh Saad told them about
the purpose of his visit. He was from a neighbouring village and his
name was Mohsin. There was immediate recognition and the next thirty
minutes were spent talking about people who were mutual relatives of
the different parties in conversation here. It turned out that the person
who had welcomed us in, an old man in his seventies, wearing a white
kurta and dhoti, was also the father-in-law of Sheikh Saad’s brother. His
name was Furqan.

‘| have come with my murshad (teacher). He is a Syed Badshah,
said Mohsin. (The Syed caste in South Asia derives their ancestry from
Prophet Muhammad {PBUH} and thus enjoy a unique privilege in
Islamic spirituality.)

‘Jazakallah (May Allah reward you with goodness). Where is he?’
asked Furgan.

‘He is just coming.’

This group of people, which besides Mohsin and Furqan, included
four more, showed no interest in us. In a pause in their conversation
about relatives and extended family I asked someone to tell me about
the saint who was buried in front of the gurdwara. It was Furqan who
decided to share the story of the saint.

Listening to his interpretation of the Muslim saint, I could not help
but draw comparisons between the ascetics that Nanak met and Pir
Munawar, which was the name of the saint buried here.


estimate

56 WALKING WITH NANAK

‘He would never ask for food and would onl

eat wh
a 7 at was Offereg
to him.

‘He stood in the canal for twelve years and used to Cat rocks.’

Despite the centuries separating the two, one could s
continuity of religious tradition. It can be argued that Pir
asceticism was a continuation of a tradition whose roots we
antiquity and whose practitioners were also yogis and ¢antrics (follower,
of Tantrism) from the Hindu tradition.

‘Do you know whose gurdwara this is?’ I asked.

Yes,’ answered a man who was sitting in front of Furgan. He Was
younger than the rest of them. He was squatting on the floor. He also
held a sickle in his hand which meant he had returned recently from
working in the fields nearby. By now Mohsin had forgotten about Sheikh
Saad and was listening to our story.

“This gurdwara is called Sachkand. It belongs to Guru Nanak,’

‘Do you know why it is called Sachkand?’I asked.

‘When Guru Nanak came of age his father gave him a few rupees
and asked him to buy something useful from the market and then trade
the goods. He travelled to this mandi. When he reached here he found
a group of yogis lost in mediation on top of a mound. The mound is
where the big gurdwara stands. Guru Nanak saw that they were ina
horrible condition. They were all skin and bones. They hadn't eaten for
days. Guru Nanak asked them why they hadn't eaten. They told him that
they were yogis and they didn’t beg for food. Guru Nanak asked them if
he could buy them anything to eat. They said yes. So when Guru Nanak
went to the market, instead of buying goods for trading he purchased
food and gave it to the yogis. However, after he had spent all his money
on buying the yogis food, he became distressed because he didn't know
what to say to his father anymore. Guru Nanak came and sat at this
spot, which is the Gurdwara Sachkand,’ he said, pointing with a sickle
towards the gurdwara.

He was a good storyteller, pausing in the middle to add emphasis and
locking eyes with different people at different times during the narration.

‘In the meantime, his father in Nankana Sahib became worried %
it was night. He sent his men to find Guru Nanak. Guru Nanak was

Munawa,,
re buried ip



" . _
tkssithbookeiyp com

AN ENCOUNTER WITH DIVINITY 57
found sitting in the jungle at this spot. When they were about to leave
for Nankana Sahib, Guru Nanak piled his mules with mud from the
ground. At Nankana when his father asked him what trade he had done,
he replied that he had bought sugar and gur. Nanak was scared that when
his father would open the bags he would learn the truth and would be
angry with him; however, when his sister opened the bags on the mules

she found that the mud had actually been changed into sugar and gur.
‘SubhanallahY’

‘Mashallah!’

‘Guru Nanak was a true devotee of God. He was a rightly guided
soul,’ added the story teller.

This version of the story was different from the one that is recorded
in the Janamsakhis. But to determine historical accuracy was not a
concern. I was intrigued that a man who looked ‘uneducated’ and who
was a Muslim knew about the story of Guru Nanak and regarded him
as a true devotee of God.

‘How did you learn of the story?’ I asked him.

‘Our elders told us. They used to live with the Sikhs before Pakistan
was made. The Sikhs used to tell them stories of Guru Nanak.’

Finally, the Syed murshad of Mohsin arrived. Furgan stood up to
greet him while the rest remained seated. He took out his cigarette pack
and offered cigarettes to everyone present. Everyone took one. It was
the month of Ramzan and eating in public was forbidden according to
the laws of the country during the time of fasting. Yet here, those social
conventions didn’t apply. This was the shrine of a dervish, and dervishes
are generally considered to be outside the orthodoxy of religiosity. The
same rules apply to his followers.

We took our leave to head to Gurdwara Sacha Sauda. Before leaving,
we entered Gurdwara Sachkand. In front of us was a picture of the
Muslim fakir wearing a green shawl and sporting a beard, sitting inside
this gurdwara. There were posters of Kaaba and Masjid Nabwi on the
walls, while there were other inscriptions on the walls professing the
Muslim identity of this building.

‘Something needs to be done about this,’ said Iqbal Qaiser as we
walked towards the car.


www. sikhbookclub.c om
 saaeieiaeeeeeeieetee ee ee

ss WALKING WITH NANAK
‘Why?’ I asked. ‘I think it’s really interesting that Muslims of th;
area have still preserved the legend of Guru Nanak. You can tell tha
they still respect him by the way they narrate the story. You don’t fing
that in the Muslims of Nankana Sahib.’

“That's true, he said. “That's because the Muslims of this area are those
who were the inhabitants of this place before Partition. Therefore they
had a relationship with the Sikhs and also associated with the legend of
Guru Nanak. The majority of the Muslims in Nankana Sahib are those
who migrated from the other side of the border following Partition. The,
lost their homes and family members at the hands of Hindus and Sikhs
Their attitudes are therefore shaped by those experiences. The Muslims in
this village were responsible for all those atrocities on Hindus and Sikhs.

‘That makes sense but why are you worried about Muslims taking
over the gurdwara and converting it into a Muslim shrine? In this manner,
at least the sanctity of the place would be preserved, if not as a Sikh shrine
then at least as a Muslim shrine. Besides, we saw how these people regard
this place to be a gurdwara first and a Muslim shrine later,’ ] argued,

‘All of that is true, but that is the case right now. Ten years down the
road the followers of the Muslim pir (a Muslim saint) would claim that
there was no gurdwara here and that this was their shrine. Then there

will be a conflict.’

‘So what you are saying is that we could have a situation similar to
Gurdwara Shaheed Ganj here?”

‘Precisely.’

Some time ago, Iqbal Qaiser had narrated the story of Gurdwara
Shaheed Ganj to me.

8

I wasnt directly involved in the issue of Gurdwara Shaheed Ganj. This was
an old issue that started about two centuries a v0. The area the gurdwara stands
tn was a vacant plot of land. No, this is not the walled city of Lahore. This 8
outside Delhi gate. This area is known as Naulakha Bazaar

Do you remember why it is called the Naulakha Bazaar? I told you the
story when we drove around the railway station the other day. Prince Dare


oa ee ee ee ee eee

Ub.com

AN ENCOUNTER WITH DIVINITY 59

shikob had his Naulakha palace here. How different the history of this region
would have been had Dara Shikoh become the Emperor instead of Auran xed.
Maybe there would have been no Partition. Who knows?

What was I saying? Yes. Naulakha Bazaar. So this was a vacant piece of
land where there was a small mosque. Sitting in that mosque, the Qazi would
announce punishment to criminals. Yes, you have guessed it right. This ts also
where innocent Sikhs were punished. Thousands of them, men, women and
children alike were slaughtered and thrown into a well here on the orders of
the Governor of Lahore, Moin-ul-Mulk also known as Meer Manu. A room
was constructed here where the prisoners were kept before they were executed.

The mosque was small and was never used as a place of worship. During
the tenure of Maharaja Ranjit Singh, the Sikhs took over the mosque, placed
the Guru Granth Sahib inside it, converting it into a gurdwara. The Muslims
could not do anything then.

It was during the British era that this issue first came to light. The Muslims

filed an application in court that this was a mosque and that it should be

returned to them. The Muslims argued that the Court should look at the
architecture of the building to judge that this was indeed a mosque. ‘The Sikhs
on the other hand argued that this had been a mosque once and that now it
had become a gurdwara.

The Lahore High Court, where the case was presented, asked if there was
anyone alive who could testify that he had seen that building used as a mosque.
Naturally, there was no one. So the court decided in favour of the Sikhs. After
the judgment the Sikhs who had control over the gurdwara decided to raze
the building because they thought that it was because of the architecture of the
building that this issue had come to the forefront.

The building was demolished. This led to rioting between Muslims and
Sikhs. It was actually the British who were responsible for these riots. It goes
back to their policy of divide and rule. Even Muhammad Ali Jinnah and
Allama Igbal got involved as they tried pacifying the Muslims. I have seen
one photograph of Jinnah standing on a chatr, speaking to a crowd of people
at the Badshahi Mosque at the time of this riot. Nothing emerged out of the
protest and the gurdwara remained a gurdwara.

After Partition, when the Augaf Department was created, this issue of
the gurdwara was raised yet again. This time, people believed that since the


kclub.cc T,

w/v desi NDOO

“ WALKING WITH NANAK
Sikhs had migrated anc 1 the gu rdwara had been abandoned, the court would
allot it to the Muslims but that did not happen. The Lahore High Cour,
decided once again that this would remain a gurdwara. When was this yoy
ash? Around 1957-58.

The issue about the property of this gurdwara or mosque was raised ong
again in the late 1980s. Some petitioners appeared in the court and asked
for the judgment to be reviewed. This time the judge ordered that he wouly
‘convert this gurdwara into a mosque if the petitioners brought forth even one
person who had prayed at the mosque. That did not happen and the status of
the gurdwara remained as ts.

In about 1994-95, the Kar Sewa Committee of England asked the
Pakistan Government for permission to renovate this gurdwara. The
government was reluctant initially but eventually gave permission. There is
a man named Avtar Singh Panghedha in the Kar Sewa Committee. I stayed
with him when I went to England and when he came to Pakistan, he stayed
with me. He asked me to supervise the construction of the gurdwara for them.
So all the money, the contracts, each and everything concerning the gurdwara
went through me. I opened up all the accounts, paid everyone, ete.

I cant even describe the things we saw when we were constructing this
building. We would dig into the ground and skeletons of children and adults
would emerge. These were the remains of the Sikhs who were killed here on
the orders of Meer Manu.

When it was mentioned in the newspapers that the Gurdwara Shaheed
Ganj was being reconstructed, the Muslims tried once again to create an issue.
This time they wanted the local people living around the gurdwara to get
involved and halt the construction of this shrine. There was a man named Rana
who was an ironsmith outside the gurdwara. You must have seen the various
ironsmiths next to the gurdwara. He was one of them. He was a wise man. He
told his fellow businessmen that the construction of the gurdwara would help
them. He told the traders that the gurdwara would attract foreign pilgrims
and it would be beneficial for everyone. He argued that if the gurdwara was
not constructed, this place would remain vacant and that would serve no one.
With his efforts the local businessmen and traders of Naulakha Bazaar became
stakeholders in the construction of the shrine and in this way this gurdwara
was eventually constructed in 2004.


Ww

ww. sikhbookclul
sikhbookclub.com
AN ENCOUNTER WITH DIVINITY 61

When this gurdwara became functional and pilgrims started visiting,
the Government of Pakistan woke up to the potential of Sikh pilgrimage
tourism. It has now invited the Sikh community living abroad to invest in
the renovation of any Sikh gurdwara in the country.

98

I saw this gurdwara for the first time in 1993 when I was researching
my book,’ said Iqbal Qaiser. The Gurdwara Sacha Sauda was in front of
us once again.

‘| was accompanied by Ilyas Ghuman. The condition of the shrine
was miserable at that time. Buffaloes were tied in the courtyard while
drug addicts and gamblers had occupied the rest of the space. At that
time there was a man from this area who was referred to as Shah. I don't
remember his real name. He had taken it upon himself to preserve the
sanctity of the gurdwara. He pleaded with the drug addicts and gamblers
to abandon this space. Instead, they beat him up and broke his head. The
fight was taking place when we arrived here. We took Shah to the nearest
hospital and got his head bandaged. ‘Then we went to the police station
and filed a report against the culprits. After that the issue appeared in
a few national newspapers. It was then that the Department of Augaf
woke up from its slumber and came to find out about this gurdwara.
They asked for Shah and appointed him the official guard of this place.
In subsequent years, the gurdwara was renovated and now it is one of the
major shrines that is visited by pilgrim tourists who come to Nankana
Sahib and Hassan Abdal.’

‘This means that you played a major part in the renovation of this
gurdwara, like in Shaheed Ganj?’ I asked him.

‘Yes.’

We parked our car in front of the iron gates of the shrine. There were
two security men sitting inside the gate while a policeman sat next to
them with his gun resting on his shoulder.

‘These are new boys,’ said Iqbal Qaiser. “They don't recognise me.
Otherwise they would have allowed us to take the car inside.’

‘My name is Iqbal Qaiser. I was responsible for getting this gurdwara


“wiw.sikhbookclub.com,

TRANQUEBAR PRESS

An imprint of westland Itd
61, IT Floor, Silverline Building, Alapakka

m Main Road, Maduravoyal, Chenn
93,1 Floor, Sham Lal Road, Daryaganj,

di 600095
New Delhi 110002

First published in TRANQUEBAR PRESS by westland Itd 2016

Copyright © Haroon Khalid 2016

All rights reserved

10987654324

ISBN: 978-93-85152-99-3

Typeset in Adobe Caslon Pro by SURYA, New Delhi
Printed at Manipal Technologies Ltd., Manipal

The author asserts his moral right to be identified as the author of this work.

This book is sold subject to the condition that it shall not by way of trade or otherwise,
be lent, resold, hired out, circulated, and no reproduction in any form, in whole or in

part (except for brief quotations in critical articles or reviews) may be made without
written permission of the publishers,

TSE SOT o omeeemmerneceeeciag Nida Stein ee SOOT Sey ARTE nicer een neste oe


viw'w. sikhbookelul.<¢ um

62 WALKING WITH NANAK
renovated,’ said Iqbal Qaiser to a young boy who had left his Seat.
walked across the gate to enquire about us. He gave us a puzzled ind
‘Is Boota Singh inside?’ asked Iqbal Qaiser. Ook,

Before coming here he had found out through his contacts jy, :
Sikh community that Boota Singh was the name of the sewadg, ( "
who serves in a gurdwara) appointed here by the Augaf Departmen,

‘He is. But who are you?’ asked the boy, who showed no intention,
of allowing us inside. ‘Do you have his number? Why don't you call him
and ask him to come to the gate?’

‘I don't have his number. It was in my old phone but I lost that One
and this is a new one. Do you have his number? Give it to me, I'll cal
him,’ said Iqbal Qaiser.

Dialling his number, Iqbal Qaiser walked away from both of us, He
returned shortly and gave the phone to the guard, who after talking to

Boota Singh, allowed us to enter.
Boota Singh was waiting for us at the entrance to the gurdwara. He

was about forty years old and was wearing a green shalwar kameez with
a green turban. His youngest son, about ten years old, who wore a shirt
and jeans stood next to him. Boota Singh was an extremely shy person
who avoided any eye contact while speaking. While conversing, when
Iqbal Qaiser got a bit close to him, he moved back, trying to reclaim his
personal space. In this manner he almost went a full circle around Iqbal
Qaiser during the course of the conversation, with one trying to get closer
while the other moved away. I wasn't sure if Iqbal Qaiser observed his

peculiar behaviour.
His son, though, looked us straight in the eye. ‘Pranam,’he said, with

his hands joined together.

As Boota Singh led us in, Iqbal Qaiser whispered into my ear, ‘I have
met this man many times but we have never really talked. I have always
come here with a jatha (a group of Sikhs) and he shows us around.’

We walked through the portal and entered a courtyard, at the cent
of which stood a white gurdwara. Next to it were a few waan trees
enclosed by a small boundary. The gurdwara, the courtyard and the trees
were situated on an ancient mound, which was the highest point in and
around the city. ‘It was under these trees that Nanak discoursed with the

leader of the yogis,’ Iqbal Qaiser told me.



www.sikhbookclub.com,

AN ENCOUNTER WITH DIVINITY 63
A few Si i 7
trees in the middle of a marbled courtyard were the last
remnants of the jungle that used to exist here

emnant sie t - According to legend, a
few yogis were hanging from the trees while th

oti “thi ere were others who were
s r t
sitting within an empty trunk when Nanak passed through. I stared

hard at the trees, picturing Nanak observing their practices. 1 was drawn

towards it. I touched one of the trees in the hope that through physical
contact I would be able to transcend the boundaries of time and space
and enter the world of Nanak and those naked ascetics.

I was there.
Nanak sat here, his legs folded under his knees, while in front of

him Santrain sat in a yoga position. Nanak was young but looked much

wiser than his age. There was curiosity in his eyes as he listened with
rapt attention.

“This gurdwara was constructed to commemorate the event.’ Iqbal
Qaiser’s words disrupted my thoughts.

We entered the shrine, which was like any other Sikh shrine. At the
centre was a wooden palanquin in which the Guru Granth Sahib was
placed. In front of the palanquin there was a space where a couple of
swords were placed. Iqbal Qaiser took out a ten rupee note and placed it
there. He then walked around the palanquin. Picking up a flying-whisk
he fanned the Guru Granth Sahib. 1 mimicked him.

‘We have constructed a new sukhasan. Let me show it to you, said
Boota Singh, with excitement in his voice. He took us behind the
gurdwara where a room had been reserved for the Guru Granth Sahib. It
was neatly carpeted while the walls had been done up in wood. There was
a split air-conditioner on the wall which was turned off at the moment
as there was no electricity. Under the air-conditioner there was a wooden

bed with intricate patterns on it. There was a blanket towards the rear
of the bed. ‘It is beautiful,’ said Iqbal Qaiser, more out of courtesy than
genuine appreciation. ‘Did you have this bed made in Amritsar?

‘No,’ replied Boota Singh. ‘It was made in Nankana Sahib. .

I wondered what Nanak would have felt at this ritualistic veneration
of the Guru Granth Sahib. According to tradition, the tenth Sikh
Guru, Guru Gobind Singh, concluded the institution of Gurudom by
declaring that the Guru Granth Sahib was the eternal Guru. The book


www.sikhbookclub.cor |
PRT halen

64 WALKING WITH NANAK
contains the spiritual poetry of the various Sikh Gurus, including Gury
Nanak and other spiritual teachers like Bhagat Kabir, Baba Farid and
Bhai Mardana. The Sikhs now treat the Guru Granth Sahib as livin,
Guru. A room like this one is constructed for the Guru Granth Sahit
at every gurdwara, where it is laid on a bed at the end of the day and the
air-conditioner is turned on if it is summer and the heater if it jg Winter
In a ritualistic procedure at the conclusion of the evening prayer each
day, the Granthi carries the Guru Granth Sahib on his head and brings
it to this room while others follow.

Guru Nanak spoke vehemently against religious institutions and
rituals. At Hindu temples, he challenged the concept of aarti. Nanak’
philosophy is centred on the concept of redefining the sacred and the
profane. Through his actions he recasts the sacred as profane and vice
versa. For example, he chooses to associate himself with people of
lowercastes, terming them people of God, while he criticises high-caste
landlords and government officials as exploiters. According to legend,
Nanak once travelled to Mecca where he performed Hajj. While on Hajj,
once at night he slept with his feet pointing towards the Kaaba. A Muslim
preacher woke him up and rebuked him for showing disrespect to the
holy shrine. It is said that Nanak turned his feet in the other direction
and as he did so, the Kaaba miraculously turned towards his feet. Put
my feet in the direction where God does not reside,’ Nanak said to the
Muslim preacher. Instead of believing the miracle that is narrated to
us, I often wonder what really happened in Mecca. Of course, any such
thought is premised upon conjecture. What is important in this story is
Nanak’s criticism of the concept of a ‘sacred space’. Every place is sacred
as far as Nanak is concerned.

With his head bowed and hands clasped in front of him, Boota
Singh walked out of the sacred room backwards, making sure that at no
point did his back face the Guru Granth Sahib. Iqbal Qaiser exited in
a similar manner. I followed.

We sat in the Porch, within sight of the gurdwara and the trees in
front of us. Boota Singh’s son served us tea. ‘Iqbal Qaiser, can you help
me renovate a particular gurdwara> asked Boota Singh.

‘Which one”

“There is a gurdwara at the village of Nena Kot in Faisalabad district.


Www .sikhbookclub.com
AN ENCOUNTER WITH DIVINITY 65

“The Gurdwara of Baba Budha?’

‘Is that the Gurdwara of Baba Budha? asked Boota Singh.

Baba Budha is an iconic Sikh saint who became a disciple of Guru
Nanak and continued serving five Gurus after him, He had the unique
role of applying the tilak on the forehead of five Gurus after Guru Nanak,
therefore appointing them as the next Guru.

‘Yes. He was from a village which lies on the other side of the river.
That side is now in India. But his gurdwara happened to remain in
Pakistan.’

‘Iqbal Sahib, you know more about our history than us,’ said Boota
Singh. He then looked at me and said, ‘Do you know he has done a great
service to the Sikh community? His research and work are phenomenal.’

I nodded in agreement and said, ‘Why don't you first work on the
renovation of the Gurdwara Sachkand? It is close to you and Sacha Sauda
is already prominent. It will be easier to get attention for that gurdwara
than any other right now.’

‘Yes,’jumped in Iqbal Qaiser.“You should focus on this gurdwara first.
The problem is that a few dervishes have taken over and built a shrine.
In the next few years they will erase any signs of the gurdwara and claim
that there was no gurdwara there.’

Boota Singh showed no interest in our suggestion. His eyes remained
glued to Iqbal Qaiser’s feet as he spoke to him.

‘Iqbal Qaiser, you've done so much research on Sikh buildings and
gurdwaras, you should also do some research on the sewadars. I have
been working here for the past twelve years. There are so many other
such stories,’ he said.

‘When did your family move to Nankana Sahib from the Tribal
Areas? Iqbal Qaiser asked him.

‘We are not from the Tribal Areas. We are Punjabis,’ replied Boota
Singh with a shy smile on his face. He was the first Pakistani Punjabi
Sikh I had interacted with. Earlier, I had only encountered Pathan Sikhs
who had moved to Punjab in the past few years. ‘I am from the village
of Nena Kot, he continued. “The gurdwara that I was telling you about
is in my village.’ a a

‘Oh, you are from that village?’ said Iqbal Qaiser with surprise. That
eurdwara is being used as a school, if I am not mistaken.


ve ww.sikhbookclub.ce n
sae een ennai etemmmmneeaemeaed

66 WALKING WITH NANAK
Yes it is. 1 studied in that school.’ Memories of his childhoog le
his face. ‘I have so many memories associated with that gurdwar, Ie
still being used as a school. I want the sanctity of that gurdwara estore
I want it to be used as a gurdwara once again.

‘Were you the only Sikh family left in your village after Partition»
Iqbal Qaiser asked. |

Yes.’

‘Did you ever face any difficulties living as a Sikh minority in ,
Muslim majority area?’ I jumped into the conversation,

‘Not really. My grandfather had good ties with everyone living
around us. That is why he stayed. His Muslim friends didn’t allow him to
leave. They told him that they would protect him, which they did. It was
only during the 1965 war that things got a bit difficult for us. A Gujjar
family from the neighbouring village took over our lands. However, my
grandfather managed to get through to the Martial Law Administrator
in Faisalabad, who sent an army official with us and got us our land
back. The army official also announced in the village that our family has
to be protected and looked after at all costs. People then realised that
we were not helpless and had the backing of the army. No one dared
trouble us after that.’

‘Did you ever feel treated unjustly as a child?’ asked him.

‘What he is trying to ask is whether your class fellows or your teachers
ever treated you as someone who was not one of them, elaborated Iqbal

aiser.

‘Never. I was friends with everyone. In fact, I was the most
hardworking student in my school. That is because unlike other children!
knew that if I was to achieve anything in life I would have to work hard.
All the teachers liked me. It used to upset me though that the gurdwara
was being used as a school. I would wonder why all the Muslim students
walked inside with their shoes on. Why couldn't they take off their shoes
here as they did at a mosque? But these were childish thoughts and J
never spoke to anyone about them. Now, however, I am determined to
restore the sacredness of that gurdwara,’

It was then that I realized that the seeds of being an introvert were
laid in Boota Singh’s personality in childhood. The way he avoided eye


www.sikhbookclub.com,

AN ENCOUNTER WITH DIVINITY 67

contact and moved away if someone got a little close was perhaps a side-
effect of repressing his emotions in childhood. I wondered how being a
religious minority in a Muslim majority area shaped his psychological
foundations? How different would his personality have been if he were

a Muslim?
WW

‘This is a newly constructed road that connects Chuhrkhana with Nankana
Sahib,’ Iqbal Qaiser told me. We were driving on a well-laid road at the
speed of a hundred kilometres an hour. “This has been constructed to
facilitate Sikh pilgrims.’ Earlier, pilgrims had to travel to Sheikupura and
then head towards Chuhrkhana, a route which added several kilometres
to the journey. Now it takes only about twenty minutes. ‘Look at what
all a primary school teacher has done,’ Iqbal Qaiser commented with
pride. He was talking about himself.

After his book was released, a debate raged about the renovation of
a number of gurdwaras, one of which was the Gurdwara Sacha Sauda.
Once the gurdwara was constructed, this new road also had to be made to
connect it to Nankana Sahib. It was truly amazing what Iqbal Qaiser has
managed to achieve through the power of his words. Nanak too became
:mmortal because of the power of his poetry. All his ideas, philosophies

and experiences would have died with him if he had not recorded them

in his words.
Nanak acknowledges the power of words when he says:

By hearing the word
One sounds the depth of virtue’ Sea.

By hearing the word
One acquires learning, holiness, and royalty.

By hearing the word
The blind see and their paths are visible.

By hearing the word
The fathomless becomes fordable.

And,


es. > ix

ee sai OMOOKCU.CcCOmM

68 WALKING WITH NANAK
O Nanak, the word hath such magic for the worshippers,

Those that hear, death do not fear,
Their sorrows end and sins disappear. 7

On another occasion he says:

Though there is no count of Thy names and habitations,
Nor of Thy regions uncomprehended,

Yet many there have been with reason perverted

Who to Thy knowledge have pretended.

Though by words alone we give Thee name and praise,
And by words, reason, worship, and Thy virtue compute;
Though by words alone we write and speak

And by words our ties with Thee constitute;

The word does not its Creator bind,

What Thou ordainest we receive,

Thy creations magnify Thee,

Thy name in all places fina.

What might have I to praise Thy might?

LI have not power to give it praise.

Whatever be Thy wish, I say Amen.

Mayst Thou endure, O Formless One.®

W

Nanak must have followed a similar route on his way back from
Chuhrkhana to Nankana Sahib, which at that point in time was still
known as Rai Bhoi di Talwindi. What took us only a few minutes would
have been a journey of hours for him, walking in the company of mules.
Instead of the agricultural fields, he would have encountered a vast jungle
that existed then between Nankana and Chuhrkhana.

Not knowing what to do after he had spent all his father’s money

"Singh, trans. Hymns of the Gurus, pages 10-11
‘Tbid., pages 15-16



Www.sikhbookclub.com

AN ENCOUNTER WITH DIVINITY 69

on a good deed, Nanak looked for sanctuary in a group of waan trees

that existed outside the town, Those trees still exist and are held sacred
by Sikh devotees, Next to the trees is a small gurdwara, a yellow single
storied structure. Behind it are two large hostels used by Sikh pilgrims
at the time of the largest Sikh festival in Pakistan—the birthday of Guru
Nanak, celebrated in November every year. Pilgrims tie pieces of cloth
onto the brane hes of these stooping trees as a supplication. Shis entire
complex is known as Gurdwara Tambu Sahib, the name derived from
the sambu (tent) like trees under which Nanak hid. Like Nanak, we were
heading in the direction of those trees where Iqbal Qaiser’s Sikh friend,
Jatha Singh, the self-appointed caretaker of the gurdwara, had invited
us for lunch.

We sat in his room, which was located in one of the rooms of a
hostel, while he was busy arbitrating between two feuding families of
the city. To my surprise, both families were Muslim. As in-charge of
the vast property associated with the gurdwara, which was allotted to it
by the Sikh ruler of Punjab, Maharaja Ranjit Singh in the nineteenth
century, Jatha Singh enjoys considerable economic influence, which often
translates to political influence. He also receives millions of rupees in
donations from Sikh expatriates residing in first world countries, which
he is responsible for spending on the upliftment of the gurdwara and
the Sikh community in Nankana Sahib. He is a well-known name in the
regional police stations, which he calls up regularly to facilitate the affairs
of friends amidst the red-tape and corruption of police proceedings. For
the Sikh community in Nankana Sahib, which amounts to about two
hundred-odd households, he has for several years played the role of a
leader. But the fact that today he was acting as an arbitrator between
two Muslim families came as a surprise.

While we sat in his room waiting for him to emerge from his meeting
we were served langar, vegetables along with lentils and hot rotss. This was
our first meal since the morning. A young Sikh boy, wearing a pyjama
and a T-shirt with a black dastaar (Sikh headgear) on his head served
us.‘May I offer you some yoghurt” he asked, as soon as we were finished
with lunch. ‘Lassi? Water?’

‘Have you seen the movie on Milkha Singh? asked Jasdeep, a young


sv stichbooke!ad, com

70 WALKING WITH NANAK
Pathan Sikh boy, a resident of Nankana Sahib. Jatha Singh had Asked }
to keep us company while he was engaged in political matters, | ru
is enrolled in the M. Phil. programme in Punjab University, Lah
He also teaches at the Government College at Chunian. He ig one
several recipients of Jatha Singh’s generosity. Only recently haye i
Sikh communities in the various cities of Pakistan, including Eminabyg
Nankana, Gujranawala and Lahore been able to exert themselves in ;
way that was unthinkable earlier. An increasing number of People ar
now enrolled in universities and many have their own cars. This Was not
how things were even a few years ago.

‘No. Have you?’ replied Kulan, the young man who had been serving

Aloo

us.

‘It is nice. If you want to see it I can give it to you. It’s on my laptop,
Do you have a USB?’

Handing his friend his red USB, Kulan commented, ‘I am looking
forward to watching this movie. Bollywood is dominated by the Hindu
lobby. They always show the Khalsa in a bad light.’

On a normal day I would never have interrupted this conversation,
but that day I did so as I felt that his analysis of the Indian film industry
was a little harsh. ‘How so?’ I asked.

“They are always shown as drinking beer and cutting their hesh (hair).

‘Isn't that how it is?’ I wanted to ask him. Alcohol sales in the Indian
state of Punjab is one of the highest compared to all the other states.
Also, a large number of young Sikh boys are increasingly abandoning the
symbols of the Sikh religion. Before I could reply, Jatha Singh entered and
the atmosphere in the room became sombre. I also knew that for Jatha
Singh and many others who grew up in the days of the Sikh insurgency
of the eighties, the Indian government was a Hindu lobby.

‘Have they made a movie on Milkha Singh?’ asked Jatha with
astonishment. ‘Do you know what they called him?’

‘The Flying Sikh,’ answered Jasdeep with excitement. ‘Ayub
Khan gave him that title,’ he added, his knowledge freshly learnt from
the movie.

‘He once came to race in Pakistan and after the race was over, Ayu
Khan said to him, “I have never seen anything faster than you. You 4



AN ENCOUNTER WITH DIVINITY 74

a Flying Sikh” Jatha said, ignoring the fact that Jasdeep had already
answered for him.

‘Did you ever meet him? I asked Jatha.

‘No. But we used to follow his races. He was popular in those times.
| once read an interview in which he said that there were only two
times in his life that he cried. One, when his parents died at the time of
Partition and second, when he lost in the Olympics in Rome. You know
he would have won that race had he not looked back and seen where the
rest were. He was leading when he looked back and all the others were
able to cross him right at the finish line.’

‘l wanted to see the movie but it has been banned in Pakistan,’
complained.

‘You know it is an Indian movie. The directors, the producers, the
actors, all are Hindus. They have to add masala (spice) in a movie.’

‘Akram is calling you again, sir,’ said a dark-skinned turbanned Sikh
peeping through the bedroom door as if scared of Jatha’s reaction.

‘What does he want now? Tell him I am coming. Iqbal Sahib, |
recommended a driver to this Muslim house. After a little while that
Muslim driver eloped with the daughter of the cook of that house. Now
the father of that girl has come to me. ] have told him that I will go to
the police station with him and file an FIR against Akram. What else
can I do? But he doesn’t want that. I have told him that in that case he
should forgive his daughter and let the couple settle. Let’s see what he
wants to say now. I’ll return in a short while.’

Jatha followed the servant out of the room. Eager to take his place
with the elders, Kulan too followed him.

‘Iqbal Sahib, in my free time I write poems. Can I recite them to you
so that you could give me feedback? asked Jasdeep.

Sure.’

Jasdeep recited a spiritual poem that criticised the dogma of religion.
It also challenged the institutionalisation of religion. Later, during
a conversation, Jasdeep told me that he lived at the Gurdwara Patti
Sahib. This small curdwara is only a few metres away from Gurdwara
Janamasthan. It was here that Guru Nanak got his early education. Here,
he wrote his first poem which is recorded in the Guru Granth Sahib.


WW ikhbookclub.com,

1 Iqbal Qaiser, my mentor



awsikhbookelub.c»,

72 WALKING WITH NANAK
ot Lb he B
.. O foolish heart, why do you forget Timi
When you render your account, O brother,
J y
Then alone will you be among the educate d.

During the early days of Sikh migration to Nankana Sahib after the War,
of 1965 and 1971, a lot of Sikh families from Khyber Pakhtunkhy, and
the Tribal Areas found refuge in Gurdwara Patti Sahib. Here, a teacher
by the name of Giani Pratap started teaching young Sikh childrep the
Gurmukhi alphabet and the Guru Granth Sahib. He was an Indiay
citizen who visited Pakistan sometime during the sixties for a Pilgrimage
to Nankana Sahib. After looking at the dilapidated condition of the
shrines here he decided to stay and look after these holy buildings, That
was the first time someone had taken the initiative to take care of the
gurdwaras in Nankana Sahib after Partition. Jasdeep was also educated jp
Sikh precepts at this gurdwara. Listening to Jasdeep’s poem, I wondered
if Guru Nanak had inspired the poet within him. As a child, he must
have heard countless tales about the Guru, one of which was that Nanak
composed the above-mentioned poem in the same building where he
lived, as a young child, and impressed his teacher, Pandit Gopal.

98

There are a total of six gurdwaras associated with Guru Nanak at Nankana
Sahib. The grandest of them is the Gurdwara Janamasthan, a splendid
structure spread over a vast area constructed over the place that was once
the house of Mehta Kalu. The actual shrine is a small room in the middle
of a spacious marble-floored courtyard. At the centre of this room is Thara
Sahib, where the Guru Granth Sahib is recited. According to tradition,
Guru Nanak was born here. Next to this shrine is a well, a board next to
which says that it belonged to the household of Guru Nanak.
Gurdwara Patti Sahib is near Gurdwara Janamsthan. A few feet
away from Gurdwara Patti Sahib is Gurdwara Bal Lila. According to
Sikh tradition, this was once an open field where Guru Nanak used to

"Dhillon, The First Sikh Spiritual Master page 25



Te OTe ee ON ee Pr ee ee ee ee ee EEE Eee ——_—— a ee

www.sikhbookclub.com,

AN ENCOUNTER WITH DIVINITY 73

play as a child. Every year on the occasion of Lohri, sports competitions
are arranged for children within the premises of this gurdwara, to mark
the event.

The gurdwaras known as Kiari Sahib and Malji Sahib are the
furthest from Gurdwara Janamsthan, while Gurdwara Tambu Sahib
fies in between Janamsthan and Kiari Sahib and Malji Sahib. Gurdwara
Kiari Sahib is said to mark the spot where Guru Nanak’s buffaloes
spoilt the fields of a local farmer who is reported to have complained to
Nanak’s father. It is believed that Guru Nanak once fell asleep while his
buffaloes were grazing nearby at the spot that Gurdwara Malji Sahib was
constructed. While he was sleeping, the sun changed direction so that
Nanak’s face was directly under the sun. Miraculously, a cobra emerged
at that time and extended its hood, protecting the Guru from the sun
while he slept.

@

‘Let me show you the ancient mound of Nankana Sahib before we go,’
said Iqbal Qaiser as we drove out of the blue gate of Gurdwara Tambu
Sahib. ‘It is an archaeological mound. The settlement there was destroyed
after which Rai Bhoi di Talwindi was constructed within a boundary wall.’

‘So Nanak was born in the new Nankana?’ | asked.

‘Yes,’

We passed through the small market of Nankana, heading towards
the Gurdwara Janamasthan. Most of the shops were run by Muslims but
there were a few Sikh-owned shops as well. We drove around Gurdwara
Janamsthan and went around the back where the ancient mound now
rests, away from the hub of the new settlement.

‘Was this also the mound that Nanak used to come to as a young
man?’ I asked.

‘Yes,’

Still not sure about his religious conviction and purpose in life, a young
Nanak used to spend a lot of time in conversation with yogis, sadhus and
dervish who would pass through Talwindi. Since this was an abandoned
area next to the town, high enough to provide a panoramic view of the


a
a
@e

Vf

4/.sikhbookclub.crm
i eteeccmnnaatmemtenat mle)

74 WALKING WITH NANAK
surrounding area, secluded enough not to be disturbed by Civilizatio
and close enough to the town if need be, most of them gathereq here
Here, Nanak would sit next to them, often posing questions to them.
spent his formative years here, engaging with representatives of differen,
schools of spiritual thought. What he learnt here must have played mn
important role in the career of the reformer Nanak.

We parked the car at a little distance from the mound and decideg
to climb it. It was a steep climb with no proper path to the top. It was at
least twenty metres from the ground. Once on top, the slight pain Caused
by the effort to get here quickly vanished as one was absorbed into the
serenity of the surroundings. The mound was covered with small shrubs
of karir (capparis deciduas), another ancient Punjabi species of plant tha
is no longer found anywhere except in abandoned places.

As we walked around the mound, I noticed a colourful bird flying
around us, jumping from one shrub to the other. It was a magnificent
red, blended with yellow, with a long tail that was longer than its body,

Iqbal Qaiser and I sat on a rock. The fertile fields of Punjab were
stretched out in front of us. Fresh from a monsoon shower, it glimmered
in the rays of the sun. There was no sadhu or dervish around us as there
must have been at the time of Nanak. We sat silently, lost in our own
thoughts. We meditated with our eyes open, observing everything that
this scene had to offer. At our feet were shards of broken pottery and

other mud utensils. The earth here had absorbed an ancient city in its
bosom just like it was embracing us at that moment.

‘The exercise was cathartic and strangely uplifting. One can understand
why a young Nanak would come here often. It is believed that in the years
between the incident of Sacha Sauda and his migration to Sultanpur,
Nanak started to frequent this place. The serenity of this place must have
provided him solace from the turmoil in his mind. That period of six to
seven years was a rough ride for him and this ancient mound sheltered
him from the storm that was brewing within and without.

‘Iqbal Sahib, while we were at Chuhrkhana I was thinking about
something and wanted to share that with you,’I said. Iqbal Qaiser listened
patiently. ‘I find it contradictory that Sikhism today has become a
institutionalised religion. I feel that Nanak’s entire struggle was against


AM ENCOUNTER WITH DIVINITY +

the rituals revolving around organised religion. Today, however, if you
walk into @ gurcwara, there is a strict code of conduct. There are proper
foraals that are followed, | remember, once | was sitting at ( jurdware
Janamasthan with my back towards the main shrine when a Sikh man
came up to me and told me to not sit with my back towards the main
shrine. 1 wanted to narrate the incident of Nanak at the Kaaba to him
at that time but refrained from doing so. | feel this incident is symbolic
of what became of Sikhism eventually. | think the subsequent Gurus
missed the essence of Nanak's movement when they institutionalised the
seligion. My question to you is—do you think Guru Gobind’s teaching
wae different from Nanak’s?’



GURU GOBIND SINGH

My first impression of Guru Gobind Singh came from Gurdwar,
Janamasthan when I was there for the annual celebration of Guru Nanaks
birthday. In front of the building was a huge banner with pictures of al]
ten Sikh Gurus. There was Guru Nanak on one side, wearing his saffron
chola and raising his right hand in blessing. There was serenity in his eyes,
At the other end of the spectrum was Guru Gobind Singh, a young, good-
looking man, wearing a silk gown and several pearl necklaces. Whereas
Nanak’s head was covered with a simple cloth, Gobind was wearing 4
tiara adorned with beautiful jewels. An eagle (4aaz) rested on his right
hand and the quiver on his shoulder was full of arrows. The images of
the other Gurus were placed in smaller sizes in-between these two.

In Sikh iconography, Guru Nanak and Guru Gobind Singh are
arguably the two most prominent personalities. Traditionalists would
argue that every Sikh Guru is equally significant and that would be true
as far as theology and legend is concerned. But as far as the development
of the Sikh religion is concerned, it is Guru Nanak and Guru Gobin
Singh who have played the most important roles.

Whereas Nanak is considered to be the founder of the Sikh religio
Guru Gobind is seen as someone who completed Nanak’s mission. Nan
discovered the path, which was then traversed by the other Sikh Gurus.
It was Guru Gobind who led the Sikh community to its destination
and gave it its current character. He codified the teachings of Nana



www.sikhbookclub.com

GURU GORIND SINGH 77

and founded the Khalsa. Sikhism at the time of Guru Gobind Singh

emerged as an independent religion, separate from Islam and Hinduism.
In the modern religious battles of the Indian subcontinent, it became
the third force.

At the time of Nanak’s death, his followers came from all kinds of
religious traditions. Nothing illustrates the religious beliefs of Guru
Nanak better than when Bhai Bala and Bhai Mardana, a Hindu and a
Muslim respectively and both companions of Nanak, asked him what
religion they should adopt to follow the religion of Guru Nanak. Nanak
himself had been born into a Hindu household and was then educated
in a Muslim milieu; however, he was neither a practising Muslim nor a
Hindu. His entire life was a struggle to dilute the differences between
these two religious communities. Everywhere he travelled, he offended
both Hindus and Muslims by stating that there was no Hindu or Muslim.
This statement did not mean that he believed in a third religious force. It
was a rejection of any sort of identity that different groups used against
each other to ferment hostility.

Answering his companions, Nanak replied that if one is a Muslim
then one should be a good Muslim and if one is a Hindu then one
should be a good Hindu.!° This statement shows that Nanak believed in
the universality of all religious traditions. He believed that any religion
followed in its essence will lead one towards the Truth, a journey that
Nanak himself traversed throughout his life.

Centuries later, Gandhi and Abdul Ghaffar Khan personified what
had been stated by Nanak, when the former used Hinduism to lead his
non-violent political movement, while the latter used Islam. These two
Proponents of religion were able to do this at a time when the political
and cultural differences between Muslims and Hindus had been much
accentuated, especially around the time of Partition. Using Hinduism, an
iconographic religion, and Islam, an iconoclastic religion, both Gandhi
and Ghaffar Khan were able to reach the same conclusion. Such results
can only be achieved if one is able to appreciate religions beyond their

"Haribala Rani Kaur Vaid, The Sikb Religion: An Introduction (New Delhi: Star
Publications, 2007), page 77


ww w.sikhbookelub.c om
RRR rename netiatnan rn tantintheortiteceitteess)

“9 WALKING WITH NANAK
rituals and be able to feel the message of a religion in one’s soul,
was able to achieve that and hence that became his message.

Building upon Nanak’s message that there is no Hinduism and Islay,
Guru Gobind came to the conclusion that both Hinduism and Islay,
were flawed religious traditions as the true message of God had beer
tainted by the promoters of these religions. He believed that in both
these religions the messengers had become more important than God
which is why a true devotee could never traverse the path of truth Using
either Islam or Hinduism."! This path, he said, could only be achieved
by following the message of Guru Nanak and the subsequent Sikh,
Gurus, for they understood in its essence the message of Guru Nanak
and hence, like Nanak, could pave the way towards Absolute Truth, He
categorically stated that any follower of Nanak who refused to obey
the commandments of the subsequent Gurus was not a Sikh. This
exclusivist approach followed by Guru Gobind Singh can be understood
in the political context of the era he was living in.

Appointed as the leader of the Sikh community at a young age, Guru
Gobind Singh’s stint as Guru was beset by several problems after the
assassination of his father Guru Tegh Bahadur, the previous Guru. The
gravest threat came from his uncle Ram Rai, who was the disgruntled
son of Guru Har Rai. When Ram Rai’s younger brother Harkrishan was
appointed the Guru instead of him, he revolted against his father and
approached Emperor Aurangzeb, who was positively inclined towards
him, for help. According to J. D. Cunningham's 4 History of the Sikhs,
the machinations of Ram Rai played an important role in the execution
of Guru Tegh Bahadur.'3 Ram Rai also had cordial relations with the
various chiefs of Punjab, who surrounded Guru Gobind’s abode in
Anandpur. Thus, the hostility of the local Punjabi chiefs also threatened
the young Guru.

Nang

"'Surjit Singh Gandhi, History of the Sikh Gurus Retold (New Delhi: Atlantic
Publishers & Dist, 2007 ), page 768

"Ibid., pages 774-775,

‘Joseph Davey Cunningham and H. O, Garrett, A History of the Sikhs, from

the Origin of the Nation to the Battles of the Sutlej (New Delhi: S. Chand, 1966);
page 109



Www Sree
““Sikhbookciuyp c
mnt. COR,

GURU GOBIND sinc 79

Guru Gobind Singh rose to
by the aa Emperor Aurangzeb, This Was perceived to be a religious
martyrdom. The symbolism of martyrdom played a critical role in the
development of Guru Gobind as a Sikh Gury and also that of the Sikh
religion. Like Shiaism within t

ion. Lik he tradition of Islam, Sikhism too induced
passion in its followers through the iconography of the sacrific
ahadur was not the first (
at the hands of the Mughals. Before him,

incarcerated by Emperor Jahangir.

the execution of Guru Arjan. As the character of Nanak is now used

in Sikhism as the founder of this religion, his encounter with the first
Mughal Emperor Babur was also interpreted to mark the beginning of
this antagonism between the Mughals and the Sikhs.

All incidents were stripped of their political contexts and presented as
a fight between religions. As the successor of such a violent legacy, Guru
Gobind was a passionate leader who successfully tapped the emotions
of his followers and prepped them to become a political group ready to
sacrifice themselves. For a community mired in violence it was no longer
possible to remain as a diffuse group situated between the identities of
Hinduism and Islam.

On the first of Vaisakh, 1699 (14 April 1699), while addressing
his followers at Anandpur, a city that had been founded by his father,
Guru Gobind Singh asked if there was anyone in the gathering who
was willing to give his head for the Guru. One by one, five volunteers
offered themselves. They were then taken behind a tent by the Guru and
a few minutes later, the Guru emerged alone, with his sword smeared
in blood. The impression that the Guru gave was that he had killed his
followers, but in reality, it was a goat’s blood. The five devotees who later
became famous as the Panj Pyare or the five beloved, were safe behind
the tents. The Guru had simply wanted to test the spirit of sacrifice in
his community and he was happy. The Sikh community was now ready
to become the Khalsa or the pure ones. Receiving instructions to observe
the five Ks (kangi, kesh, kirpan, hachcha and hada) of Sikhism, mene
community became the Khalsa. The Sikh attire which now included a
turban to hold the uncut hair (kesh), a sword (kirpan), a steel bangle

power after the execution of his father

e of the
suru to be persecuted
Guru Hargobind had been

Jahangir was also responsible for


54 sikhbooke! up, com
re ON
80 WALKING WITH NANAK

(kada), short drawers (kachcha) and a comb (kangi) was to becg
source of their separate identity. the

This transition to Khalsa was not easy. There were several cg
who believed in the teachings of Nanak and that of th
including Gobind Singh, but refused to abandon their former - Un
beliefs and take up the five Ks of the Khalsa. In Sikh records it js reco " .
that those communities that were further away from the centrality of th
Guru at Anandpur were the most reluctant to take up the Khalsa Tike
of discrimination at the hands of the Khalsa against those who refused ;
follow this latest order of the Guru are also recorded. The Gury hime
was not very tolerant of those who refused to take up the Khalsa, [n thi
righteous battle between ‘right’ and ‘wrong’, between the Sikhs and the
Mughals, the Guru had no space for dissenters, 14

Guru Gobind Singh had become Guru at the age of nine in the year
1675. He was assassinated at the hands of Pathan horse traders in the yea
1708. Sikh theology regards Gobind as the ninth incarnation of Guru
Nanak himself. It is believed that the flame of the lamp of Nanak was
passed from one Guru to the next and in this way the spirit of Nanak
remained alive in all the subsequent Gurus. According to this logic, al
followers of Nanak were also urged to become followers of the rest of the
Gurus. In the Guru Granth Sahib, the poems of the rest of the Gurus
are recorded, not in their own names but in that of Guru Nanak, in such
a way that Arjan becomes the fourth Nanak while Gobind becomes the
ninth Nanak. Despite such a clear link depicted between the Gurus,
there are several devotees of Nanak who refused to join the Khalsa of
Guru Gobind Singh. They continued calling themselves ‘Sikh’, a term
that was derived by Nanak, but refused to be called Singhs, those who are
baptised into the Khalsa of Guru Gobind Singh. There are thousands of
such Sikhs living in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa, Punjab and Sindh in Pakistan,
and they are referred to as Nanak Panthi Hindus. In their temples, along
with pictures of Hindu deities, one also finds a picture of Guru Nanak.

For devoted Sikhs (those of the Khalsa), there is no contradiction

Unit;
Ry
© other G

ee, a

“J:S. Grewal, Four Centuries of Sith Tradition (New Delhi: OUP India, 20!!)
pages 190-192 .


Ww

ww.sikhbookclub.com

GURU GOBIND SINGH 81
between me ehings of Guru Nanak and that of Guru Gobind. It is
believed that Guru Gobind only took forward that which was initiated
by Guru Nanak. However, even the most ardent of followers cannot
deny the differences in the lifestyles of the two Gurus. Guru Nanak
was a fakir or a Jogi who spent his entire lifetime in a few clothes and
travelled between different villages and cities singing his songs of peace.
Guru Gobind Singh, on the other hand, lived like a sovereign. He lived
ina regal tent which was adorned with beautiful carpets and furniture.!5
He dressed like a prince. He was in command of a standing army, whose
weapons were procured through the offerings of devotees or through
raids upon neighbouring villages. He also had a war drum, which at the
time was the sole prerogative of a sovereign. He was referred to as Sacha
Padshah, the True King, and his court was referred to as Sacha Darbar,
the True Court. The chiefs of the neighbouring states viewed him more
as a political contestant than as a religious personality. Guru Gobind
regularly dabbled in the local politics of his region by throwing his weight
behind particular chiefs in times of interstate rivalries.1°

Guru Gobind Singh was particularly fond of warlike exercises.
He wanted to instil discipline in his followers and therefore made war
exercises an essential part of their routine. He urged his followers to offer
weapons at the court of the Guru so they could be used in the army of
the Khalsa.!” The chiefs of the states surrounding Guru Gobind Singh
followed these developments with some trepidation. He was also fond
of hunting and spent a lot of his time hunting dangerous game. At heart
Guru Gobind Singh was a warrior and it is for this reason that on the
occasion of his birthday his devotees pay tribute to him by enacting
scenes of war exercises.

To imagine Guru Gobind Singh purely as a warrior would be to
undermine his personality. He was fond of literature and was adept in
Persian, Arabic and Sanskrit. In his court, he is said to have invited poets,

Gandhi, History of the Sikh Gurus Retold, page 698
'6Cunningham’s account of Guru Gobind Singh in A History of the Sikhs

This was a practice that was started by Guru Hargobind but then reinforced
by Guru Gobind Singh


